Welcome everyone. Thank you for standing by for the Alphabet second quarter 2023
earnings conference call. At this time all participants are in a listen-only
mode. After the speaker presentation there will be a question and answer
session. To ask a question during the session you will need to press star 1 on
your telephone. I would now like to hand the conference over to your speaker
today, Jim Friedland, Director of Investor Relations. Please go ahead. Thank
you. Good afternoon everyone and welcome to Alphabet second quarter 2023 earnings
conference call. With us today are Sundar Pichai, Philip Schindler and Ruth
Peratt. Now I'll quickly cover the safe harbor. Some of the statements that we
make today regarding our business operations and financial performance may
be considered forward-looking and such statements involve a number of risks and
uncertainties that could cause actual results to differ materially. For more
information please refer to the risk factors discussed in our most recent
form 10k filed with the SEC. During this call we will present both gap and non-gap
financial measures. A reconciliation of non-gap to gap measures is included in
today's earnings press release which is distributed and available to the public
through our investor relations website located at abc.xyz forward slash
investor. Our comments will be on year-over-year comparisons unless we
state otherwise. And now I'll turn the call over to Sundar. Thank you Jim and
hello everyone. We are holding our call from London today. It's an important hub
for us and I'm excited to spend time with our local teams including Google
DeepMind as well as leaders and partners from across the region. This
quarter we shared great progress at IO, Brandcast and Google Marketing Live and
we are looking forward to cloud next in August. The momentum across the company
drove our results this quarter. We delivered solid performance in search
in YouTube and ongoing strong growth in cloud where we remain focused on long
term value creation. And we continue our important work to operate more
efficiently creating durable savings to fund investments in our biggest
priorities. Today I'll talk about this momentum including our continued
leadership in AI and our excitement about the evolution of search. At IO we
shared how we are making AI helpful for everyone in four important ways. First,
improving knowledge and learning. This is our seventh year as an AI first
company and we intuitively know how to incorporate AI into our products. Large
language models make them even more helpful models like Palm II and soon
Gemini which we are building to be multimodal. These advances provide an
opportunity to reimagine many of our products including our most important
product search. We are in a period of incredible innovation for search which
has continuously evolved over the years. This quarter saw our next major
evolution with the launch of the search generative experience or SGE which uses
the power of generative AI to make search even more natural and intuitive.
User feedback has been very positive so far. It can better answer the queries
people come to us with today while also unlocking entirely new types of
questions that search can answer. For example, we found that generative AI can
connect the dots for people as they explore a topic or project helping them
weigh multiple factors and personal preferences before making a purchase or
booking a trip. We see this new experience as another jumping-off point
for exploring the web enabling users to go deeper to learn about a topic. I'm
proud of the engineering excellence underlying our progress. Since the May
launch we've boosted serving efficiency reducing the time it takes to generate
AI snapshots by half. We'll deliver even faster responses over time. We are
engaging with the broader ecosystem and will continue to prioritize approaches
that send valuable traffic and support a healthy open web. Ads will continue to
play an important role in this new search experience. Many of these new
queries are inherently commercial in nature. We have more than 20 years of
experience serving ads relevant to users commercial queries and SGE enhances our
ability to do this even better. We are testing and evolving placements and
formats and giving advertisers tools to take advantage of generative AI.
Phillip will talk more about how we are using generative AI in our ads products
to better serve both advertisers and users. Second we are helping people use
AI to boost their creativity and productivity. One example is BARD our
experiment in conversational AI. Since launching in March it continues to get
better. We rolled out a number of exciting features and capabilities
earlier this month. BARD is now available in most of the world and over
40 of the most widely spoken languages. We also added Google Lens capabilities
so you can take an image and ask all kinds of questions, turn it into code
and more. This new feature has been really popular and it's been great to
see people sharing their experiences. BARD can now read its responses aloud
and you can adjust them for tone and style. We continue to see great interest
in using BARD for coding tasks. On productivity earlier this year we
introduced Duvet AI in both Google Cloud and Workspace. It helps people
collaborate with AI to code, write and get better insights from data and more.
Today more than 750,000 workspace users have access to the new features in
preview. Third we are making it easier for others to innovate using AI. One way
is by providing Google Cloud's high performance infrastructure optimized for
a range of generative AI models. It's being used by thousands of customers and
partners to transform their businesses. I'll give an update on the cloud
business in just a moment. Finally we are making sure we develop and deploy AI
technology responsibly so that everyone can benefit. Last week we signed on to
joint commitments with other leading AI companies at the White House building on
the principles that have guided our work for many years. To take advantage of the
AI opportunities ahead we've been sharpening our focus as a company
investing responsibly with great discipline and finding areas where we can
operate more cost effectively. We've made good progress in data center
machine efficiency which will pay dividends as we continue to invest in AI.
We continue to slow our expense growth and pace of hiring and ensure our teams
are aligned to our highest priorities. This quarter we relocated a number of
teams including aligning Waze's ad sales with our existing business
organization. We are combining various engineering efforts across core
infrastructure and cloud. Products like Bard and SGE are being built by small
fast-moving teams that have been reallocated to these high priority
efforts. Overall we are actively moving people to higher priority activities
within the company and we continue to optimize our real estate footprint for
current and future needs. Next Google Cloud. We see continued growth with Q2
revenue of 8 billion dollars up 28% and operating profit of 395 million dollars.
Our AI optimized infrastructure is a leading platform for training and
serving generative AI models. More than 70% of Gen AI unicorns are Google Cloud
customers including cohere, Jasper, typeface and many more. We provide the
widest choice of AI supercomputer options with Google TPUs and advanced
NVIDIA GPUs and recently launched new A3 AI supercomputers powered by NVIDIA's
H100. This enables customers like AppLavin to achieve nearly two times
better price performance than industry alternatives. Our new generative AI
offerings are expanding our total addressable market and winning new
customers. We are seeing strong demand for the more than 80 models including
third-party and popular open source in our Vertex, search and conversational AI
platforms with the number of customers growing more than 15x from April to June.
Among them Priceline is improving trip planning capabilities, Carrefour is
creating full marketing campaigns in a matter of minutes and Capgemini is
building hundreds of use cases to streamline time-consuming business
processes. Our new anti-money laundering AI helps banks like HSBC identify
financial crime risk and our new AI powered target and lead identification
suite is being applied at Cereble to help enable drug discovery. Our generative AI
capabilities also give us an opportunity to win new customers and upsell into our
installed base of 9 million paying Google Workspace customers. I mentioned
Duet AI earlier, Instacart is using it to improve customer service workflows and
companies like Xtend are scaling sales outreach and optimizing customer service.
Customers confidently choose Workspace because of the safety and security we
provide their distributed workforces. Our AI capabilities are helping us
differentiate core products like cyber security. We have integrated AI
throughout our portfolio, winning organizations like Pfizer who are using
Google Cloud to transform their security operations. Chronicle Security
Operations Suite with Mandi and fully integrated is helping customers stay
protected at every stage of the security lifecycle. In the first half of
2023 we saw a 35% increase in incident response engagements compared to the
same period last year. Finally our AI capabilities are also expanding our
partner ecosystem with hundreds of ISVs and SaaS providers such as Box, Salesforce
and Snorkel and the world's largest consulting firms like Accenture and
Deloitte. They've collectively committed to train more than 150,000 people on
Google Cloud generative AI. Turning next to YouTube, earlier this year we shared
that revenues across YouTube products were nearly 40 billion for the 12 months
ending in March. I'm really pleased with how YouTube is growing audiences and
driving increased engagement. YouTube shots are now watched by over 2 billion
logged in users every month up from 1.5 billion just one year ago. The living
room remained our fastest growing screen in 2022 in terms of watch time. We are
reaching more than 150 million people on connected TV screens in the US and
seeing growth and momentum internationally and on subscriptions
there's good growth. Late last year we announced over 80 million YouTube music
and premium subscribers. Signups for NFL Sunday Ticket kicked off in April and we
look forward to hosting our first football season on YouTube this fall.
Finally hardware and Android. Pixel continues to have strong sales momentum.
We introduced new Pixel devices at I.O. including Pixel Fold, Pixel Tablet and
Pixel 7a and we've had a great response. Android 14, our latest OS, will
incorporate our advances in generative AI to personalize Android phones. The
Pixel and Android teams are working together to advance the latest devices.
The Pixel Fold is a great example with its many hardware and software
innovations. Before I close you may have seen that we just announced some
exciting news that Ruth is taking on the important new role of President and
Chief Investment Officer. As our longest-serving CFO she has helped guide
the company through an amazing period of growth, a global pandemic and the
ongoing economic uncertainty that has followed. I'm excited to continue to work
with Ruth who will lead our 2024 planning and remain a CFO while we do a
full search for a successor. So it's business as usual now and no change in
approach for the future. I look forward to seeing the impact Ruth will have in
our new role driving our investments, engaging with our stakeholders and
creating opportunities for people and communities everywhere. To close I'm
energized by the pace of innovation and the momentum across the company. With 15
products that each serve a half a billion people and six that serve over
two billion each we have so many opportunities to deliver on our mission.
Thank you to our employees around the world for their great work this quarter.
Over to you Philip. Thanks Ondar and hello everyone. Happy to be here with
you all today. Let's jump right into our performance for the quarter. Google
services revenues of 66 billion were up 5% year-on-year. In Google advertising
search and other revenues grew 5% year-on-year led by solid growth in the
retail vertical. In YouTube ads revenues were up 4% year-on-year driven by growth
and brand followed by direct response reflecting further stabilization and
advertisers spent. In network revenues declined 5% year-on-year. Google other
revenues were up 24% year-on-year led by strong growth and YouTube subscriptions
revenues. Let's now take a few minutes to cover our three key priority areas
Google AI, retail and YouTube which I've laid out in prior quarters as clear
opportunities for long-term advertising growth. I'll then turn it over to Ruth
for more details on our financial performance. Q2 was a big quarter for
Google AI and our ads products. IO, GML and Brandcast were a testament to our
deep commitment to building cutting-edge tools and solutions that help
businesses navigate complexity in real time and deliver the results they need
all while improving the experience for users.
Sooner covered some of these innovations. I'll share more. It's worth reiterating
that while Generative AI is now supercharging new and existing ads
products with tons of potential ahead AI has been at the core of our ads business
for years. In fact today nearly 80% of advertisers already use at least one AI
powered search ads product. Our approach to AI in ads remains grounded in
understanding what drives real value for businesses right now and what's most
helpful for users. Advertisers tell us they're looking for a more assistive
experience to get set up with us faster. So at GML we launched a new
conversational experience in Google Ads powered by a LLM tune specifically from
ads data to make campaign construction easier than ever. Advertisers also tell
us they want help creating high-quality ads that work in an instant. So we're
rolling out a revamped asset creation flow and performance max that helps
customers adapt and scale their most successful creative concepts in a few
clicks. And there's even more with PMACS. We launched a new asset insights and new
search term insights that improve campaign performance understanding and
new customer lifecycle goals that let advertisers optimize for new and
existing customers while maximizing sales. We've long said it's all about
reaching the right customer with the right creative at the right time. So
later this year automatically created assets which are already generating
headlines and descriptions for search ads will start using generative AI to
create assets that are even more relevant to customer queries. Broadmatch
also got updates. AI based keyword prioritization ensures the right keyword
bid, budget, creative and landing page is chosen when there are multiple
overlapping keywords eligible. And then to make it easier for advertisers to
optimize visual storytelling and drive consideration in the mid funnel we're
launching two new AI powered ad solutions demand gen and video view
campaigns and both will include shorts inventory. Sundar talked earlier about
SGE and our early experiments with new ad formats. We're in active conversations
with advertisers, publishers and partners to get their input on how to make these
solutions work best for them and are excited to test and evolve this
experience as we learn more. Let's pivot to retail where we had a good quarter.
Profitability remains a top theme for retailers so solutions like PMACs that
drive bottom line value continue to do well. We also continue to see success in
helping businesses unlock efficient growth and deliver on their omni channel
goals. Take Ace Hardware who tapped into AI powered search and omni bidding to
capture increased seasonal demand leading up to Memorial Day. This drove
increases across online sales, store visits and in-store sales resulting in
87% year-over-year growth and omni revenue from Google Ads and led to one
of the largest revenue weeks ever for a store owners. Q2 also brought innovation
on the consumer and merchant front. We rolled out a new gen AI powered virtual
try-on tool that brings the fitting room experience online. Shoppers can try on
women's tops across a wide array of models from brands like Anthropology,
Everlane, H&M and Loft. Rich visual engaging content is a win-win for both
consumers and merchants. In fact product office with more than one image see a
76% average increase in impressions and a 32% increase in clicks. Our new
product studio uses gen AI to help retailers create tailored eye-catching
imagery for free and we're working towards optimizing for performance. We
think this will be a game changer especially for SMBs who can now create
high-quality images to use both across Google and their own sites without
spending a lot of time or money. As we continue to make Google a valuable place
for merchants to grow their businesses and connect with users, Merchant Center
Next is another win. We've seen 2x growth in the number of businesses using
Merchant Center in the past two years and we're now simplifying it by
automating inventory management and giving a consolidated view of
performance insights. Better tools means better growth for merchants and better
experiences for users. Moving to YouTube. I've said it before I'll say it again.
YouTube starts with our creators and it's their success and our multi-format
strategy that will drive YouTube's long-term growth. In prior quarters I've
laid out how we think about this enabling our creators to make a living
on our platform with more formats and awesome tools leads to more content
which leads to quality consumption of video content another big focus of the
team and this leads to better opportunities for monetization and for
advertisers to support this incredible ecosystem. As we think about growth we're
focused on Shorts, Connected TV and our subscription offerings all of which grew
nicely this quarter. Let me double-click into Shorts and CTV. First Shorts momentum
remains strong. Watch time and monetization are moving in the right
direction. Last year we introduced ads on Shorts to help drive performance and
direct response campaigns via video action, performance max and app
campaigns. As of Q2 brand advertisers can start testing Shorts ads and awareness
campaigns. It's still early days but we're excited by the results. Laneige the
more Pacific's number one premium skincare brand was an early adopter. It
leaned into video reach campaigns and new creative over 10-day tests to drive
a 21% increase in unique users reach from Shorts and Infeed all the more
efficient CPM. Second Connected TV. Substantial engagement by viewers and
ROI for advertisers is driving monetization of the living room. We are
very pleased with the growth we've seen and how we're delivering the reach
results and relevance that businesses are looking for at scale. At Brandcast
we announced two new ad offerings for streaming. First 30-second unskippable ads
are coming to YouTube select which is landing 70% plus of impressions on the
TV screen. 30-second ads are a TV industry staple and now YouTube is
bringing our advanced audience capabilities and unparalleled reach to
the format. We're also exploring new pause experiences so brands can drive
awareness or action when you hit pause. Looking at YouTube holistically
according to our measurement partners Nielsen, TransUnion and Ipsis MMA,
YouTube delivers higher ROI than TV and other online video on average. Take the
Hershey company. As part of a multi-year partnership to optimize its YouTube
strategy Hershey's brands have been tapping into CTV efficient AI powered
formats and made for platform creative leading to YouTube becoming its number
one ROI driving media partner producing a 65% plus increase in ROI from
2018 to 2023. One last highlight that bridges the power of YouTube with our
continued efforts to bring the best across Google to our partners. With Warner
Brothers Discovery we expanded our multi-year relationship across our entire
Android ecosystem including partnering on the launch of Max a deepened mutually
beneficial relationship on Google TV and plans to work together on new surfaces.
YouTube's expanded deal for Max inclusive of a Max NFL Sunday ticket bundle on
YouTube TV also underscores our joint commitment to bring the highest quality
content and experiences to our customers. I'll close by echoing Sundar with a huge
thank you to Googlers everywhere for their incredible passion and hard work
and to our customers and partners for their continued collaboration and trust.
Ruth over to you. Thank you Philip. Before I go into the results first Sundar
thank you very much for the opportunity. I'm very excited about the new role and
I look forward to it. So turning to the results we're very pleased with our
financial results for the second quarter which reflect an acceleration of growth
in search and momentum in cloud. My comments will be on year-over-year
comparisons for the second quarter unless I state otherwise. I will start
with results at the alphabet level followed by segment results and
conclude with our outlook. For the second quarter our consolidated revenues were
seventy four point six billion up seven percent or up nine percent in constant
currency. Search remained the largest contributor to revenue growth. Total cost
of revenues was thirty one point nine billion up six percent driven by other
cost of revenues of nineteen point four billion which was up eight percent.
Growth here was driven by content acquisition costs primarily for YouTube
subscription offerings followed by hardware costs associated with pixel
family launches in the second quarter. As noted in our earnings release the
overall increase in data center and other operations costs was partially
offset by a reduction in depreciation expense due to the change in estimated
useful lives we discussed last quarter. Operating expenses were twenty point
nine billion up four percent. Operating income was twenty one point eight billion
up twelve percent and our operating margin was twenty nine percent. I will
cover our expense and margin performance in our outlook. Other income and expense
was sixty five million. Net income was eighteen point four billion. We delivered
free cash flow of twenty one point eight billion in the second quarter and seventy
one billion for the trailing twelve months reflecting improved operating
performance as well as the deferral of certain tax payments to the fourth
quarter of twenty twenty three as noted in our earnings release. We ended the
quarter with one hundred and eighteen billion in cash and marketable
securities. Turning to our segment results prior period results have been
recast for two changes that we made as of the first quarter. First DeepMind is
now reported as part of Alphabet's unallocated corporate costs. Second we
updated our cost allocation methodologies. In the second quarter we
then combined the brain team from Google research with DeepMind to form Google
DeepMind. Costs associated with the brain team which were previously included in
Google services are now reported as part of Alphabet's unallocated corporate
costs. We have not recast prior period results to reflect this additional
change. Within Google services revenues were sixty six point three billion up
five percent. Google search and other advertising revenues of forty two point
six billion in the quarter were up five percent led by growth in retail. YouTube
advertising revenues of seven point seven billion were up four percent
driven by brand advertising followed by direct response reflecting further
stabilization in spending by advertisers. Network advertising revenues of seven
point nine billion were down five percent. Other revenues were eight point
one billion up twenty four percent reflecting growth in YouTube non
advertising revenues primarily from subscription growth in YouTube music
premium and YouTube TV followed by growth in hardware revenues primarily
driven by the launch of the Pixel 7a in the second quarter. Finally Play returned
to positive growth in the second quarter. Tech was twelve point five billion up
three percent. Google services operating income was twenty three point five
billion up eight percent and the operating margin was thirty five percent.
Turning to the Google Cloud segment revenues were eight billion for the
quarter up twenty eight percent. GCP revenue growth remained strong across
geographies industries and products. That being said we saw continued
moderation in the rate of consumption growth as consumers optimized their
spend. Google workspace strong revenue growth was driven by increases in both
seats and average revenue per seat. Google Cloud had operating income of
three hundred and ninety five million and the operating margin was five
percent. As to our other bets for the second quarter revenues were two
hundred and eighty five million and the operating loss was eight hundred and
thirteen million. The decrease in operating loss was primarily driven by a
reduction in valuation based compensation liabilities related to
certain other bets. Turning to our outlook for the business with respect to
Google services first within advertising. We were pleased with the
acceleration of search advertising revenue growth in the second quarter. Our
continued ability to generate sustained growth reflects our unparalleled
engineering innovation that creates extraordinary experiences for users and
capabilities for advertisers and delivered with the deep expertise of our
go-to-market team. And in YouTube we saw ongoing signs of stabilization in
advertiser spending. We are prioritizing product focus on increasing quality
consumption of video content with both shorts and in the living room which is
translating into improved monetization. Second within other revenues. In our
YouTube subscription products the sustained strong growth in revenues
reflects significant subscriber growth. You may have seen that last week we
increased subscription prices for YouTube music and premium which
underscores the value of the products. Strong year-on-year growth in hardware
revenues was due in large part to a timing change given the pixel 7a was
launched in the second quarter whereas the pixel 6a launch occurred in the
third quarter last year. Looking ahead the launch timing change will be a head
wind to hardware revenue growth in the third quarter. Play returned to positive
growth in the second quarter driven primarily by a solid increase in the
number of buyers. Turning to Google Cloud we are particularly excited about the
customer interest in our AI optimized infrastructure our large language models
our AI platform services and our new generative AI offerings such as duet AI
for Google workspace although we are still clearly in the early days. At the
same time we continue to experience headwinds in the second quarter for
moderation in consumption growth as customers optimize their spend. We
continue to invest aggressively while remaining focused on profitable growth.
In terms of expenses and profitability we remain very focused on durably
reengineering our cost base. Most evident to date are the actions we have taken to
reduce the pace of headcount growth including the workforce reductions we
announced in the first quarter and a slower pace of organic hiring in part
given our focus on reallocating talent from within to fuel our growth
priorities. A quick comment on the sequential improvement in operating
margins in the second quarter. There are two factors to note first the benefit
from an acceleration in search advertising revenue growth in the second
quarter. Second the vast majority of the charges related to our workforce
reduction and optimization of our global office space were taken in Q1. Finally as
it relates to CapEx in Q2 the largest component was for servers which
included a meaningful increase in our investments in AI compute. The sequential
step up in the second quarter was lower than anticipated for two reasons. First
with respect to office facilities we continue to moderate the pace of fit-outs
and ground-up construction to reflect the slower expected pace of headcount
growth. Second there were delays in certain data center construction
projects. We expect elevated levels of investment in our technical
infrastructure increasing through the back half of 2023 and continuing to
grow in 2024. The primary driver is to support the opportunities we see in AI
across Alphabet including investments in GPUs and proprietary TPUs as well as
data center capacity. With all that said we remain committed to durably
reengineering our cost base in order to help create capacity for these
investments in support of long-term sustainable financial value. Thank you.
Sundar, Philip and I will now take your questions. Thank you. As a reminder to ask
a question you will need to press star 1 on your telephone. To prevent any
background noise we ask that you please mute your line once your question has
been stated. Our first question comes from Brian Nowak of Morgan Stanley.
Please go ahead. Let's take my questions. I have two. The first one up for Sundar
and I'll be curious to learn about some of your early learnings and surprises
around consumer behavior on how people are using Bard versus Search and what
new behaviors or consumer utility are you most excited about as you think
about what Gemini could provide for people over the course of the next year
or so. And then the second one for Ruth. Ruth congrats on the new position.
One question is about the durable expense comments. I think last quarter
you talked about the idea that expenses could grow slower than revenue in 2024.
Is that still the right way to think about it? And just to confirm does that
include the impact of depreciation in those comments? Thanks. Thanks Brian. I'll
take the first part. You know it's definitely early days but both across
Bard and search and rate of experience you know feedback has been very positive
from our users. I think you know we are definitely now you know able to serve
you know I would say deeper and broader information use cases which is very
exciting. Yeah you know I wouldn't say surprise. So for example people really
using it to for coding you know something we understood but it's
definitely on the news side. There's a lot of excitement around we integrated
Google Lens into Bard. We have known how how big Google Lens can be. We see that
in the visual searches we get and how much it has grown over the last two
years and so we've been doing this for a while but definitely that in Bard has
been super well received. So which gives me a sense that as given Gemini is being
built from the ground up to be multimodal I think that's an area that's
going to excite users and I go back many years ago when we did universal search
whenever for users we can abstract different content types and put them in
a seamless way they tend to receive it well and so I'm definitely excited about
what's ahead. And on your second question Brian we are really pleased with the
operating performance in the second quarter. We've been saying for some time
that we are focused on revenue growth ahead of expense growth and achieve that
for the first time in some time and that is cost of sales plus operating expense
overall and we do remain very focused on durably re-engineering our cost base.
There are a lot of stream work streams that are in flight and I mentioned a
couple of them in opening comments this remains a major priority as Sundar and
I both commented on. Great thank you both. Thank you. The next question comes from
Eric Sheridan of Goldman Sachs. Please go ahead. Thank you so much for taking the
questions maybe one for Sundar and one also for Ruth. Sundar can you talk a
little bit about elements of open source versus closed and things a bit like
custom silicon and how you're thinking about AI offerings broadly developing
over the next couple of years and what you see is some of the key
differentiation points that Google either through the cloud business or the
consumer offerings are going to bring to market and how we should think about
differentiation playing out to a greater degree in AI in the years ahead
they'll be number one and then Ruth I'll let go Brian's congrats as well on the
new role you know maybe both of you could talk to why this type of role
might be important at this point in time for alphabet and and Ruth what you're
looking to sort of drive into the organization from this new role as you
move into it in the fall thanks thanks Eric on the first part you know
obviously a big topic you know would broadly say you know the investments for
AI you know when you look at the type of deep computer science work the talent we
have worked hard to bring to the company and from the ground up the infrastructure
we have built from the earliest days Google has been a company we've thought
about the switches in our data centers wherever we think we can do the best and
get it get an advantage by by innovating we have chosen to do so we have done
that on AI on the on the silicon side but what's important to us is really you
know stay focused on our users and customers and you know support all the
innovations that's needed so for example with cloud we've been we've really
embraced open architecture we've you know we have embraced customers wanting
to be multi-cloud when it makes sense for them so similarly you would see with
AI we will embrace you know we will offer not just our first-party models
we'll offer third-party models including open source models I think open source
has a critical role to play in this ecosystem Google contributes we are one
of the largest contributors to if you if you look at hugging phase and in
terms of the contribution there when you look at projects like Android chromium
and so on Kubernetes and so on so we'll embrace that and we'll stay at the
cutting edge of technology and I think I think that'll serve us well for the
long term on the second part of your question first of all I'm very grateful
and thankful to all the work that Ruth has done for the company it's too
invaluable to capture in words I am super thrilled that she's going to
continue on an impactful new role and at the scale of our company with the broad
changes in technology I think it's more important than ever before to engage on
these issues globally at scale you know and and advocate on the economic
opportunity of the investments we make across alphabet and Google and I'm I'm
glad that she's going to continue a CFO and so no change is there and we'll take
the time to find a successor and Ruth will be closely involved not just on
that but also our long-range planning including 2024. Ruth anything to add?
Just to underscore when you asked the point about impact one of the places
Sundar and I have discussed quite a bit is landing well the 2024 capital plan
and the multi-year plan and completing all of the very important efforts we
have underway we're excited about what they mean setting the company up well to
be able to invest for long-term growth and so we're continuing to execute
against those and then I think Sundar summarized it well we see technology can
make such a difference in the lives of so many and the lives of economies and
to be able to focus on the impact on economic growth and the opportunity for
people for organizations for countries I think is a privilege I'm really excited
about it in particular with this amazing company and so focusing there as well as
the investments that we make across Alphabet to drive economic growth
globally across numerous sectors. Great thank you. Thank you. The next question
comes from Doug Anmuth of JP Morgan please go ahead. Thanks for taking
questions one for Sundar and one for Ruth. First Sundar curious how do you
think about timing for more broadly integrating generative AI into search
and more specifically what are some of the things you'll need to see could do
that and then Ruth just on capex the 2Q capex lower than expected as you
explain do you still expect modestly higher capex in 23 versus 22 and then I
know it's getting a little bit ahead but how should we think about kind of timing
of that real estate and office optimization efforts you know through 23
and then also into 24. Thanks. Look on on the surgenerative experience you know we
we definitely you know wanted to make sure we're thinking deeply from first
principles while it's exciting new technology we've constantly been
bringing in you know AI innovations into search for the past few years and this
is the next step in the journey but you know it is a big change so we thought
about from first principles it really gives us a chance to now not always be
constrained in the way search was working before allowed us to think
outside the box and you know I see that play out in the experience so I would
say you know we are ahead of where I thought we would be at this point in
time and the feedback has been very positive you know we've just improved
our efficiency pretty dramatically since the product launched the latency has
improved significantly we are keeping a very high bar and but I would say we are
ahead on all the metrics in terms of how we look at it internally and so couldn't
be more pleased with it and so you will you will see us continue to bring it to
more and more users and over time this will just be how search works and so
while it's a you know we are taking deliberate steps you know we are
building the next major evolution in search and I'm pleased with how it's
going so far in terms of capex I tried to lay out sort of the cadence of capex
and the point what's an important one that the sequential step up in the
second quarter was lower than anticipated for the two reasons I noted
one the work that we're doing around office facilities and then the delays in
certain data center construction projects but that's why we wanted to be
really clear that we do expect elevated levels of investment in our technical
infrastructure and that would be increasing through the back half of 2023
consistent with the comments we've made previously that we had expected 2023 to
be higher and given the slower start at the front half of the year and then
continuing to grow into 2024 and the primary driver of this as you know well
as to support the opportunities we see in AI across the company including the
investments that we've already talked about proprietary TPUs all that we're
doing with GPUs as well as data center capacity and as we continue to see the
pace of innovation accelerate we just want to make sure we're positioned to
address the opportunity across alphabet and to your the other part of your
question when we look at real estate optimization that's one of many work
streams that are important when we talk about durably re-engineering our cost
base to create capacity for investments and support long-term sustainable
financial value and we're continuing to work against that thank you both thank
you the next question comes from Lloyd Walmsley of UBS please go ahead thanks
a lot for taking the question I wanted to just follow up on the some of the
SGE questions and just get a sense I know it's early but what are you seeing
in terms of of monetization and how do you guys think about that as you scale
up the deployment of SGE is that like there's a lot of concern out there that
that may be in the short term it's a bit of a headwind but over the longer term
maybe maybe query growth from a more useful product can kind of kind of make
up for that but how do you guys see that playing out and and what can you
share there maybe I can give some color here you know we have obviously been
focused on bringing this experience and making sure it works well for users and
it's very clear to me first of all as a user myself that are certain queries for
which the answers are so so significantly better it's a clear
quality win and and so I think we we are definitely headed in the right direction
and we can see it in our metrics and the feedback we are getting from our users
as well and the thing that doesn't change with these experiences is is that
many you know you know a lot of user journeys are commercial in nature you
know they that are inherent commercial user needs and what's exciting to me is
that SGE gives us an opportunity to serve those needs again better right and
better so it's clearly an exciting area and as part of that the fundamentals
don't change users have commercial needs and they are looking for choices and
there are merchants and advertisers looking to provide those choices so
those fundamentals are true in SGE as well and you know we have a number of
experiments in flight including ads and we are pleased with the early results we
are seeing and so you know we will continue to evolve the experience but I'm
comfortable at what we are seeing and we have a lot of experience working through
these transitions and we'll bring all those learnings here as well all right
thank you thank you the next question comes from Justin Post of Bank of
America please go ahead great thank you just asked about the cloud it really
looks like revenue growth stabilized despite optimization so could you talk
about the pipeline and the client wins in the quarter how you fell about those
and then any uptick are you seeing related to AI spending in the total
revenues this quarter or in the second half thank you thanks Justin okay it is
an exciting moment overall in cloud because there is definitely a lot of
interest from customers on on AI and they definitely are engaging in many
more conversations with us so you know I would say you know without commenting on
the short term but you know when I think about it long term I view the AI
opportunity as expanding our total addressable market and allows us to win
new customers you know scale of scale of investments that we can directly bring
to cloud now you know as I said earlier we have over 80 models across vertex
enterprise search and conversational AI and we are taking all of them
translating it into deep industry solutions so you know I'm excited about
it second it gives us an opportunity to upsell and cross sell into our install
base so for example if you think about do what AI in Google Workspace now it's
a collection of all our regenerative AI part collaboration features you know we
can bring it and make it available to more than nine million paying Google
Works workspace customers similarly do what AI in Google Cloud you know is
again allows us to go back to our install base and engage in deeper
conversations and finally I think AI helps us differentiate our core
products for example if you take a look at cybersecurity we are deeply
incorporating AI to you know drive profound changes there so overall I'm
excited excited and I view this as a long-term opportunity and all the
investments we are doing in AI across Alphabet including you know the work we
are doing in Google DeepMind and Google Research on Gemini and so on are
directly applicable to cloud as well so excited about it great thank you maybe
one follow-up for Ruth did the infrastructure cloud grow faster than
workspaces again this quarter so we we did I don't think we commented on that
yes in the second quarter GCP growth was above the growth rate for cloud
overall great thank you thank you the next question comes from Michael
Nathanson of Moffat Nathanson please go ahead thanks I want to fill up one for
Sundar Phil talk about the the ad market if you step back you're seeing real size
now weakness in linear TV ad agencies small digital companies we're all
slowing and the macro backdrops don't be cloudy yet you guys have accelerated
your growth this quarter what factors are you looking at do you see that would
you know identify why are you growing while others are really struggling and
slowing now and then Sundar I think you spent over a hundred billion dollars on
R&D over the past five years and yet there's a narrative that it's so
competitive and so expensive to compete going forward can you tell talk a bit
about how you're visiting that R&D spend any near-term cadence updates he
gave us for growth and any factors that could change the growth code going
forward for research and development spending for you guys thanks maybe I can
comment on the how we think about R&D and look if anything I think two things
we are always committed to driving deep computer science research and
innovation that's the foundation on which the company is built and taking
that and applying it and building new products and services and generating
value is the virtuous cycle and you said nothing changes in that fundamental
thesis we are definitely you know both you know as Ruth mentioned on AI
investments we are going to be committed to making sure we invest to realize the
opportunity but all the work we are doing on efficiency and optimization
applies to on the AI side as well and so we are bringing all that lens there so
that we do this responsibly but no overall changes in our philosophy are
approached there and maybe I'll let Philip comment on the overall market
dynamics yes look I can't comment on others but our focus continues obviously
to be helping customers through whatever uncertainty or complexity they're facing
and a lot of companies are focused on profitability driving efficiencies and
and they're carefully evaluating the effectiveness of their budgets and our
goal is really to help them maximize efficiency and drive star our eye and I
think we have the proven AI power tools and solutions to actually do it I called
out search and other revenues being led by solid growth or retail vertical we
talked about the DR and brand side on the YouTube side I think those are the
key points I would make thank you thank you the next question comes from Ken
Goverelsky of Wells Fargo please go ahead yes thank you so much for the
opportunity appreciate that can I ask on performance max you've had great
success there could you talk about any vertical or use case expansions and how
long until we possibly get to the point of more automated AI generated creative
and production yeah look this is a great question AI is a foundational component
that really allows us to help users advertisers pops partners at scale and
we've been on journey for years right to take the key components of advertising
whether it's bidding targeting and creatives as well as innovation frankly
in the core advertiser and publisher experiences and improve them
dramatically through AI and performance max is an example of all this comes
together at scale for advertisers they provide us with business goal a set of
assets and we can then take care of the rest to meet consumer demand and really
deliver on advertiser our eye and as you heard it at GML we've seen over many
quarters we continue to build new AI features really on top of this I think I
talked a bit in my prepared remarks about where we're taking some of our
products from a gen AI perspective and if you take a look at some of the things
we announced there it's fair to say whether you look at our revamped
asset creation flow and performance max whether you look at automatically
created assets whether you look at product studio and so on then we're on a
right path to deliver some really exciting new innovation in automated let
me call it asset creation in the broader sense
thank you thank you our last question comes from Mark Mahaney of Evercore
please go ahead okay actually I'll follow up on that last question Philip
you know you pointed out AI has been used to improve the advertising mouse
trap at Google for you know many years do you view generative AI as Justin
material accelerant of your ability to return to improve return on ad spend
for the millions of marketers who use Google and if you think about where
generative AI would have the most impact could you could you could you peel it
apart what's your guess now over the next couple years where it's going to
have the most impact on the creative on the audience creation on the ad the
campaign optimization where do you think the most impact will come from
generative AI just for all the that your advertising customers thanks look as I
said earlier at generative AI is supercharging new and existing ads
products with really tons of potential ahead and then we're really helping
advertisers here make better decisions solve problems enhance creativity and I
covered this earlier for example we launched a new conversational
experience in Google Ads the asset creation flow in P max I mentioned the
automatically created assets the product studio and so on when I talk to
customers they're very excited about AI and understandably have some questions
one of the top questions is for example what's the next best step I should take
and this is a key reason why we launched our Google Ads AI essentials which was a
big announcement at GML it's a checklist of simple steps customers can take right
now to unlock the power of AI and has to do with the foundation of data and
measurement it has to do with taking action with our AI products and it
really is a mindset shift to set up organizations for AI success so those
are just some of the examples if you extrapolate those going forward those
are some of the examples where I see a lot of upside apart from the points
that's on the already mentioned and I think all of this is before we have a
multi-modal capabilities really in the mix and and so looking at the early
innovations there I think it's going to be an exciting couple years ahead thanks
Mark thank you thank you Philip congratulations Ruth thank you and that
concludes our question-and-answer session for today I'd like to turn the
conference back over to Jim Friedland for any further remarks thanks everyone
for joining us today we look forward to speaking with you again on our third
quarter 2023 call thank you and have a good evening thank you everyone this
concludes today's conference call thank you for participating you may now
disconnect
