Mr. Speaker, Madam Vice President, our first lady and second gentleman, good to see you
guys up there. Members of Congress. By the way, Chief Justice, I may need a court order.
She gets to go to the game tomorrow, next week. I have to stay home. Gotta work something
out here. Members of the cabinet, leaders of our military, Chief Justice, Associate
Justice, and retired Justice of the Supreme Court, and to you, my fellow Americans. You
know, I start tonight by congratulating 118th Congress, the new Speaker of the House, Kevin
McCarthy. Speaker, I don't want to ruin your reputation, but I look forward to working
with you. I want to congratulate the new leader of the House Democrats, the first African
American minority leader in history, Hakeem Jeffries. He won, in spite of the fact I
campaigned for him. Congratulations, the longest serving leader in the history of the United
States Senate, Mitch McConnell. Where are you, Mitch? And congratulations to Chuck Schumer,
another term as Senate minority leader. You know, I think this time you have a slightly
bigger majority, Mr. Leader. You're the majority leader. About that much bigger? Well, I tell
you what, I want to give special recognition to someone who I think is going to be considered
the greatest speaker in the history of the House of Representatives, Nancy Pelosi. Folks,
the story of America is a story of progress and resilience, of always moving forward,
of never, ever giving up. It's a story unique among all nations. We're the only country
that has emerged from every crisis we've ever entered stronger than we got into it.
Look, folks, that's what we're doing again. Two years ago, the economy is reeling. I stand here
tonight after we've created, with the help of many people in this room, 12 million new jobs,
more jobs created in two years than any president has created in four years because of you all.
Because of the American people. Two years ago,
in two years ago, COVID had shut down, our businesses were closed, our schools were robbed
of so much. And today, COVID no longer controls our lives. And two years ago, democracy faced
its greatest threats in civil war. And today, though bruised, our democracy remains unbowed
and unbroken. As we gather here tonight, we're writing the next chapter in the great American
story, a story of progress and resilience. When world leaders asked me to define America,
and they do, believe it or not, I can define it in one word, and I mean this,
possibilities. We don't think anything is beyond our capacity. Everything is a possibility.
You know, we're often told that Democrats and Republicans can't work together.
But over the past two years, we've proved the cynics and naysayers wrong.
Yes, we disagreed plenty. And yes, there were times when Democrats went alone.
But time and again, Democrats and Republicans came together, came together to defend a stronger
and safer Europe. You came together to pass one in a generation, one in a generation,
once in a generation infrastructure law, building bridges connecting our nation and our people.
We came together to pass the most significant law ever, helping victims expose the toxic burn pits.
And in fact,
it's important.
And in fact, I signed over 300 bipartisan pieces of legislation since becoming president,
from reauthorizing the Violence Against Women Act, the Electoral Count Reform Act,
the Respect for Marriage Act that protects the right to marry the person you love.
And to my Republican friends, if we could work together in the last Congress,
there's no reason we can't work together and find consensus on important things in this Congress as
well. I think,
folks,
you all are as formed as I am, but I think the people sent us a clear message.
Fighting for the sake of fighting, power for the sake of power, conflict for the sake of conflict
gets us nowhere. That's always been my vision of our country, and I know it's many of yours
to restore the soul of this nation, to rebuild the backbone of America,
America's middle class, and unite the country. We've been sent here to finish the job, in my view.
For decades, the middle class has been hollowed out in more than and not no one administration,
but for a long time. Too many good paying manufacturing jobs move overseas,
factories closed down, once thriving cities and towns that many of you represent
became shadows of what they used to be. Along the way, something else we lost, pride,
our sense of self-worth. I ran for president to fundamentally change things,
to make sure our economy works for everyone, so we can all feel that pride in what we do.
To build an economy from the bottom up and the middle out, not from the top down. Because when
the middle class does well, the poor have a ladder up and the wealthy still do very well. We all do
well. I know a lot of you are always kidding me for always quoting my dad, but my dad used to say,
Joey, a job's about a lot more than a paycheck. He really would say this. It's about a lot more
than a paycheck. It's about your dignity. It's about respect. It's about being able to look your
kid in the eye and say, honey, it's going to be okay and mean it. Well, folks, so let's look at
the results. We're not finished yet, by any stretch of the imagination, but unemployment
rate is at 3.4 percent, a 50-year low. A near record unemployment for black and Hispanic workers.
We've already created, your help, 800,000 good-paying manufacturing jobs, the fastest
growth in 40 years. And where is it written? Where is it written that America can't lead the world in
manufacturing? And I don't know where that's written. For too many decades, we imported
projects and exported jobs. Now, thanks to what you've all done, we're exporting American products
and creating American jobs. Folks, inflation has been a global problem because the pandemic
disrupted our supply chains and Putin's unfair and brutal war in Ukraine disrupted
energy supplies as well as food supplies, blocking all that grain in Ukraine. But we're better
positioned than any country on earth right now. But we have more to do. But here at home, inflation
is coming down. Here at home, gas prices are down $1.50 from their peak. Food inflation is
coming down, not fast enough, but coming down. Inflation has fallen every month. For the last six
months, our take-home pay has gone up. Additionally, over the last two years, a record 10 million
Americans applied to start new businesses, 10 million. And by the way, every time,
every time someone starts a small business is an act of hope. And Madam Vice President, I want to
thank you for leading that effort to ensure that small businesses have access to capital
and the historic laws we enacted that are going to just come into being.
Standing here last year, I shared with you a story of American genius and possibilities,
semiconductors, small computer chips the size of a fingerprint that power everything from cell
phones to automobiles and so much more. These chips were invented in America. Let's get that
straight. They were invented in America. We used to make 40 percent of the world's chips.
In the last several decades, we lost our edge. We're down to only producing 10 percent. We all
saw what happened during the pandemic when chip factories shut down overseas. Today's automobiles
need 3,000 chips, each of those automobiles. But American automobiles couldn't make enough cars
because there weren't enough chips. Car prices went up. People got laid off. So did everything
from refrigerators to cell phones. We can never let that happen again.
That's why, that's why we came together to pass the Bipartisan Chips and Science Act.
Folks, I know I've been criticized for saying this, but I'm not changing my view.
We're going to make sure the supply chain for America begins in America. The supply chain
begins in America. We've already created 800,000 new manufacturing jobs without this law before the
law kicks in. With this new law, we're going to create hundreds of thousands of new jobs across
the country. And I mean all across the country, throughout not just the coast, but through the
middle of the country as well. That's going to come from companies that have announced more than
300 billion dollars in investment in American manufacturing over the next few years. Outside
of Columbus, Ohio, Intel is building semiconductor factories on a thousand acres, literally a field
of dreams. It's going to create 10,000 jobs, that one investment. 7,000 construction jobs,
3,000 jobs in those factories once they're finished. They call them factories. Jobs
paying an average of $130,000 a year, and many do not require a college degree.
And jobs, because we work together, these jobs where people don't have to leave home
to search for opportunity. It's just getting started. Think about the new homes, the small
businesses, the big, the medium-sized businesses, so much more that's going to be needed to support
those 3,000 permanent jobs and the factories that are going to be built. Talk to mayors and
governors, democrats and republicans, and they'll tell you what this means for their communities.
We're seeing these fields of dreams transformed to the heartland,
but to maintain the strongest economy in the world, we need the best infrastructure in the world.
And folks, as you all know,
we used to be number one in the world in infrastructure. We've sunk to 13th in the world.
The United States of America, 13th in the world in infrastructure, modern infrastructure.
But now we're coming back because we came together and passed the bipartisan infrastructure law,
the largest investment infrastructure since President Eisenhower's interstate highway system.
Folks, already we've funded over 20,000 projects, including major airports from Boston to Atlanta
to Portland, projects that are going to put thousands of people to work rebuilding our
highways, our bridges, our railroads, our tunnels, ports, airports, clean water,
high-speed internet all across America, urban, rural, tribal. And folks, we're just getting
started. We're just getting started. And I mean this sincerely. I want to thank my Republican
friends who voted for the law and my Republican friends who voted against it as well.
But I'm still, I still get asked to fund the projects in those districts as well,
but don't worry. I promised I'd be a president for all Americans.
We'll fund these projects and I'll see you at the groundbreaking.
Look, this law, this law will further unite all of America. Projects like Brent Spent Bridge in
Kentucky over the Ohio River built 60 years ago, badly needed repairs, one of the nation's most
congested freight routes carrying $2 billion worth of freight every single day across the
Ohio River. And folks, I've been talking about fixing it for decades, but we're really finally
going to get it done. I went there last month with Democrats and Republicans and from both states
to deliver a commitment of $1.6 billion for this project.
While I was there, I met a young woman named Sarah who's here tonight. I don't know where Sarah is.
Is she up in the box? I don't know. Sarah, how are you? Well, Sarah, for 30 years,
for 30 years, I learned, she told me she'd been a proud member of the iron workers local 44
known as known as the cowboys in the sky.
The folks who built built Cincinnati's skyline. Sarah said she can't wait to be 10 stories above
the Ohio River building that new bridge. God bless her. That's pride. And that's what we're
also building. We're building back pride. Look, we're also replacing poisonous lead pipes that
go into 10 million homes in America, 400,000 school and childcare centers. So every child in
America, every child in America can drink the water instead of having permanent damage to their
brain. Look, we're making sure that every community in America has access to affordable
high speed internet. No parent should have to drive by McDonald's parking lot to help them do
their homework online with their kids, which many thousands were doing across the country.
And when we do these projects, and again, I get criticized for this, but I make no
excuses for it. We're going to buy American. We're going to buy America.
And it's totally, it's totally consistent with international trade rules.
Buy America has been the law since 1933. But for too long, past administrations,
Democrat and Republican have fought to get around it. Not anymore. Tonight I'm announcing
new standards require all construction materials using federal infrastructure projects to be made
in America, made in America. I mean, lumber, glass, drywall, fiber optic cable. And on my
watch American roads, bridges, and American highways are going to be made with American
products as well. Folks, my economic plan is about investing in places and people
that have been forgotten. So many of you listening to you tonight,
I know you feel it. So many of you felt like you've just simply been forgotten.
Made the economic upheaval of the past four decades, too many people have been left behind
and treat it like they're invisible. Maybe that's you watching from home. Remember the jobs that
went away. You remember them, don't you? The folks at home remember them. You wonder whether the path
even exists anymore for your children to get ahead without having to move away. Well, that's
why I get that. That's why we're building an economy where no one's left behind. Jobs are
coming back. Pride is coming back. Because choices we made in the last several years,
you know, this is my view of blue collar blueprint to rebuild America and make a real difference in
your lives at home. For example, too many of you laying bed at night like my dad did,
staring at the ceiling wondering what in God names happens if your spouse gets cancer
or your child gets deadly ill or something happens to you. Are you going to have to get money to pay
for those medical bills? Are you going to have to sell the house or try to get a second mortgage on
it? I get it. I get it. With the inflation reduction act that I signed into law, we're
taking on powerful interest to bring healthcare costs down so you can sleep better at night
with more security. You know, we pay more for prescription drugs than any nation in the world.
Let me say it again. We pay more for prescription drugs than any major nation on earth. For example,
one in 10 Americans has diabetes. Many of you in this chamber do. And in the audience.
But every day, millions need insulin to control their diabetes so they can literally stay alive.
Insulin has been around for over 100 years. The guy who invented it didn't even patent it because
he wanted to be available for everyone. It cost the drug companies roughly $10 a vial to make that
insulin. Packaging it all, you may get up to $13. But big pharma has been unfairly charging
people hundreds of dollars, $400 to $500 a month, making record profits. Not anymore.
So many, so many things that we did are only now coming to fruition. We said we were doing this,
and we said we passed the law to do it. But people didn't know because the law didn't take
effect until January 1 of this year. We capped the cost of insulin at $35 a month for seniors
on Medicare. People are just finding out. I'm sure you're getting the same calls I'm getting.
Look, there are millions of other Americans who do not or are not on Medicare, including 200,000
young people with type 1 diabetes and need this insulin to stay alive. Let's finish the job this
time. Let's cap the cost of insulin for everybody at $35. The big pharma is still going to do very
well, I promise you all. I promise you, they're going to do very well. This law also caps and
won't go into effect until 2025 costs out-of-pocket drug costs for seniors on Medicare
at a maximum of $2,000 a year. You don't have to pay more than $2,000 a year no matter how much
your drug costs are, because you know why? You all know it. Many of you, like many in my family,
have cancer. You know the drugs can range from $10,000, $11,000, $14,000, $15,000 for the cancer
drugs. If drug prices rise faster than inflation, drug companies are going to have to pay Medicare
back the difference. We're finally giving Medicare the power to negotiate drug prices,
bringing down prescription drug costs doesn't just save seniors money,
it cuts the federal deficit by billions of dollars, by hundreds of billions of dollars,
because these prescription drugs are drugs purchased by Medicare to keep their commitment
to the seniors. Well, guess what? Instead of paying four or five hundred bucks a month,
you're paying fifteen. That's a lot of savings for the federal government.
And by the way, why wouldn't we want that? Now some members here are threatening, and I know
it's not an official party position, so I'm not going to exaggerate, but certainly to repeal the
Inflation Reduction Act. As my coach, that's okay, that's fair. As my football coach used to say,
lots of luck in your senior year. Make no mistake, if you try anything to raise the
cost of prescription drugs, I will veto it. Look, I'm pleased to say that more Americans
have health insurance now than ever in history. A record 16 million people enrolled in the
Affordable Care Act. And thanks to the law signed last year, saving millions of saving $800 a year
on their premiums. And by the way, that law was written and the benefit expires in 2025.
So my plea to some of you, at least in this audience, let's finish the job and make these
savings permanent. Expand coverage on Medicaid. Look, the Inflation Reduction Act is also the
most significant investment ever in climate change. Ever. Lower utility bills, creating
American jobs, leading the world to a clean energy future. I visited the devastating aftermath
of record floods, droughts, storms, and wildfires from Arizona, New Mexico, to all the way up to the
Canadian border. More timber has been burned, as I've observed from helicopters, than the entire
state of Missouri. And we don't have global warming, not a problem. In addition to emergency
recovery from Puerto Rico to Florida to Idaho, we're rebuilding for the long term. New electric
grids that are able to weather major storms and not prevent those forest fires. Roads and water
systems will stand the next big flood. Clean energy to cut pollution and create jobs and
communities often left behind. We're going to build 500,000 electric vehicle charging stations
installed across the country by tens of thousands of IBW workers.
And we're helping families save more than a thousand dollars a year with tax credits
to purchase electric vehicles and efficient appliances, energy efficient appliances.
Historic conservation efforts to be responsible stewards of our land. Let's face reality.
A climate crisis doesn't care if you're in a red or blue state. It's an existential threat.
We have an obligation not to ourselves, but to our children and grandchildren to confront it.
I'm proud of how America at last is stepping up to the challenge.
We're still going to need oil and gas for a while. But guess what? No, we do.
But there's so much more to do. We've got to finish the job. And we pay for these investments
in our future by finally making the wealthiest and biggest corporations begin to pay their fair
share. Just begin. Look, I'm a capitalist. I'm a capitalist, but pay your fair share.
I think a lot of you at home, a lot of you at home agree with me and many people
that, you know, the tax system is not fair. It is not fair.
Look, the idea that in 2020, 55 of the largest corporations in America, the Fortune 500,
made 40 billion dollars in profits and paid zero in federal taxes. Zero.
Folks, it's simply not fair. But now, because of the law I signed, billion dollar companies
have to pay a minimum of 15 percent. God love them. 15 percent. That's less than a nurse pays.
Let me be crystal clear. I said at the very beginning, under my plans, as long as I'm
president, nobody earning less than four hundred thousand dollars will pay an additional penny in
taxes. Nobody. Not one penny. But let's finish the job. There's more to do. We have to reward work,
not just wealth. Pass my proposal for the billionaire minimum tax. You know,
there's a thousand billionaires in America. It's up from about six hundred in the beginning.
But no billionaire should be paying a lower tax rate than a school teacher or firefighter.
I mean, think about it.
I know you aren't enthusiastic about that, but think about it. Think about it. Have you noticed
Big Oil just reported its profits, record profits? Last year, they made two hundred billion dollars
in the midst of a global energy crisis. I think it's outrageous. Why? They invested too little
of that profit to increase domestic production. And when I talked to a couple and they say,
we're afraid you're going to shut down all the oil wells and all the oil refineries anyway,
so why should we invest in them? I said, we're going to need oil for at least another decade.
And that's going to exceed and beyond that. We're going to need it. Production.
If they had, in fact, invested in the production to keep gas prices down instead, they use the
record profits to buy back their own stock, rewarding the CEOs and shareholders.
Corporations ought to do the right thing. That's why I propose we quadruple the tax on corporate
stock buybacks and encourage long, long term investments. They'll still make considerable
profit. Let's finish the job and close the loopholes, allow very wealthy to avoid paying
their taxes instead of cutting the number of orders for wealthy taxpayers. I just signed a
law to reduce the deficit by one hundred and fourteen billion dollars by cracking down on
wealthy tax cheats. That's being fiscally responsible. In the last two years,
my administration has cut the deficit by more than one point seven trillion dollars,
the largest deficit reduction in American history. Under the previous administration,
the American deficit went up four years in a row because those record deficits,
no president added more to the national debt in any four years than my predecessor.
Nearly 25 percent of the entire national debt that took over 200 years to accumulate
was added by just one administration alone, the last one. They're the facts. Check it out.
Check it out. How did Congress respond to that debt? They did the right thing. They lifted the
debt ceiling three times without preconditions or crisis. They paid American bills to prevent
an economic disaster in the country. So tonight I'm asking the Congress to follow suit.
Let's come in here tonight to the full face of the United States. America will never,
ever be questioned. So my many some of my Republican friends want to take the economy
hostage. I get it unless I agree to their economic plans. All of you at home should
know what those plans are. Instead of making the wealthy pay their fair share, some Republicans,
some Republicans want Medicare and Social Security sunset. I'm not saying it's a majority.
Let me give you anybody who doubts it.
Contact my office. I'll give you a copy. I'll give you a copy of the proposal.
That means Congress doesn't vote. Well, I'm glad to see you. I tell you, I enjoy conversion.
You know, it means if Congress doesn't keep the programs the way they are, they go away.
Other Republicans say I'm not saying it's a majority of you. I don't think it's even a
significant but it's being proposed by individuals.
I'm not politely not naming them, but it's being proposed by some of you.
Look, folks, the idea is that we're not going to be we're not going to be moved into being
threatened to default on the debt if we don't respond. So, folks, as we all apparently agree,
Social Security and Medicare is off the off the books now.
All right. We got unanimity.
Social Security and Medicare are lifeline for millions of seniors. Americans have to pay
into them from the very first paycheck they started. So tonight,
let's all agree, and we apparently are, let's stand up for seniors.
Stand up and show them we will not cut Social Security. We will not cut Medicare.
Those benefits belong to the American people. They earned it. And if anyone tries to cut
Social Security, which apparently no one's going to do, and if anyone tries to cut Medicare,
I'll stop them. I'll veto it. I'm not going to allow them to take away,
be taken away. Not today, not tomorrow, not ever. But apparently it's not going to be a problem.
Next month, when I offer my fiscal plan, I asked my Republican friends to lay down their plan as
well. I really mean it. Let's sit down together and discuss our mutual plans together. Let's do
that. I can tell you, the plan I'm going to show you is going to cut the deficit by another $2
trillion. And it won't cut a single bit of Medicare or Social Security. In fact, we're
going to extend the Medicare trust fund at least two decades, because that's going to be the next
argument. How do we keep it solvent, right? Well, we'll not raise taxes on anyone making
under $400,000, but we'll pay for it the way we talked about by making sure that the wealthy and
big corporations pay their fair share. Look, look, look, here's the deal. They're not just
taking advantage of the tax code. They're taking advantage of you, the American consumer. Here's my
message to all of you out there. I have your back. We're already preventing Americans from receiving
surprise medical bills, stopping $1 billion surprise bills per month so far. We're protecting
seniors' life savings by cracking down on nursing homes that commit fraud, endanger patient safety,
prescribe drugs that are not needed. Millions of Americans can now save thousands of dollars
because they can finally get a hearing aid over the counter without a prescription.
Look, capitalism without competition is not capitalism. It's extortion. It's exploitation.
Last year, I cracked down with the help of many of you on foreign shipping companies that were
making you pay higher prices for every good coming into the country. I signed a bipartisan bill to
cut shipping costs by 90%, helping American farmers, businessmen, and consumers. Let's
finish the job, pass the bipartisan legislation to strengthen antitrust enforcement and prevent
big online platforms giving their own products an unfair advantage.
My administration is also taking on junk fees, those hidden surcharges too many companies use
to make you pay more. For example, we're making airlines show you the full ticket price up front,
refund your money if your flight is canceled or delayed. We've reduced exorbitant bank overdrafts
by saving consumers more than $1 billion a year. We're cutting credit card late fees by 75%
from $30 to $8. Look, junk fees may not matter to the very wealthy, but they matter to most
other folks in homes like the one I grew up in, like many of you did. They add up to hundreds
of dollars a month. They make it harder for you to pay your bills or afford that family trip.
I know how unfair it feels when a company overcharges you and gets away with it.
Not anymore. We've written a bill to stop it all. It's called the junk fee prevention act. We're
going to ban surprise resort fees that hotels charge on your bill. Those fees can cost you
up to $90 a night at hotels that aren't even resorts. The idea that cable internet and cell
phone companies can charge you 200 or more if you decide to switch to another provider.
Give me a break. We can stop service fees on tickets to concerts and sporting events
and make companies disclose all the fees up front and we'll prohibit airlines from charging $50
round trip for family just to be able to sit together. Baggage fees are bad enough. Airlines
can't treat your child like a piece of baggage. Americans are tired of being. We're tired of being
played for suckers. So pass. Pass the junk free prevention act. So companies stop ripping us off
for too long. Workers have been getting stiffed, but not anymore. We're getting,
we're beginning to restore the dignity of work. For example, I should have known this,
but I didn't until two years ago. 30 million workers have to sign non-compete agreements
with the jobs they take. 30 million. So a cashier at a burger place can't walk across town and take
the same job at another burger place and make a few bucks more. It just changed. But they just
changed it because we exposed it. That was part of the deal guys. Look it up, but not anymore.
We're banning those agreements so companies have to compete for workers and pay them what they're
worth. And I must tell you, this is bound to get a response from my friends on my left with the right.
I'm so sick and tired of companies breaking the law by preventing workers from organizing.
Pass the pro act because business have a right. Workers have a right to form a union.
Let's guarantee all workers have a living wage. Let's make sure working parents can
afford to raise a family with sick days, paid family medical leave, affordable child care.
That's going to enable millions of more people to go and stay at work and let's restore
the full child tax credit, which gave tens of millions of parents some breathing room
and cut child poverty in half to the lowest level in history. And by the way,
when we do all these things, we increase productivity. We increase economic growth.
So let's finish the job and get more families access to affordable quality housing.
Let's get seniors who want to stay in their homes the care they need to do so.
Let's give more breathing room to millions of family caregivers looking after their loved ones.
Pass my plan so we get seniors and people with disabilities the home care and services they need
and support the workers who are doing God's work.
These plans are fully paid for and we can afford to do them.
Restoring the dignity of work means making education an affordable ticket to the middle class.
You know, when we made public education, 12 years of it, universal in the last century,
we made the best educated, best paid. We became the best educated, best paid nation in the world.
The rest of us caught up. It's caught up. Jill, my wife, who teaches full time.
Has an expression. I hope I get it right, kid. Any nation that out educates us is going to out
compete us. Any nation out educates can out compete us. Folks, we all know 12 years of
education is not enough to win the economic competition of 21st century.
We want to have the best educated workforce. Let's finish the job.
By providing access to preschool for three, four years old. Studies show that children
who go to preschool are nearly 50 percent more likely to finish high school and go on to earn
a two or four year degree, no matter their background they came from.
Let's give public school teachers a raise.
We're making progress by reducing student debt, increasing Pell grants,
the working and middle class families. Let's finish the job and connect students to career
opportunities starting in high school, provide access to two years of community college,
the best career training in America, in addition to being a pathway to a four year degree.
Let's offer every American a path to a good career, whether they go to college or not.
And folks, folks, in the midst of the COVID crisis, when schools were closed
and we were shutting down everything, let's recognize how far we came in the fight against
the pandemic itself. While the virus is not gone, thanks to resilience of the American people and
the ingenuity of medicine, we've broken the COVID grip on us. COVID deaths are down by 90 percent.
We've saved millions of lives and opened up our country. We opened our country back up
and soon we'll end the public health emergency. But that's called a public health emergency.
But we'll remember the toll and pain that's never going to go away. More than a million
Americans lost their lives to COVID, a million families grieving, children orphaned,
empty chairs at the dining room table constantly reminding you that she used to sit there
remembering them. We remain vigilant. We still need to monitor dozens of variants and support
new vaccines and treatments. So Congress needs to fund these efforts and keep America safe.
And as we emerge from this crisis stronger, we're also going to double down on prosecuting
criminals who stole relief money meant to keep workers and small businesses afloat.
Before I came to office, you remember during that campaign, the big issue was about inspector
generals who would protect taxpayers' dollars from the sidelines. They were fired. Many people said
we don't need them. And fraud became rampant. Last year, I told you the watchdogs are back.
Since then, since then we've recovered billions of taxpayers' dollars. Now let's triple the
anti-fraud strike force going after these criminals, double the statute of limitations
on these crimes and crack down on identity fraud by criminal syndicates stealing billions of dollars,
billions of dollars from the American people.
And the data shows that for every dollar we put in the fighting fraud, the taxpayers get back at
least 10 times as much. It matters. It matters. Look, COVID left its scars like the spike in
violent crime in 2020, the first year of the pandemic. We have an obligation to make sure
all people are safe. Public safety depends on public trust, as all of us know,
but too often that trust is violated. Joining us tonight are the parents of Tyree Nichols. Welcome.
We had to bury Tyree last week.
As many of you personally know, there's no word to describe the hard-acre grief of losing a child.
But imagine, imagine if you lost that child at the hands of the law. Imagine having to worry whether
your son or daughter came home from walking down the street playing in the park or just driving a
car. Most of us in here have never had to have the talk, the talk that brown and black parents have
had to have with their children. Beau, Hunter, Ashley, my children, I never had to have the talk
with them. I never had to tell them, if a police officer pulls you over, turn your interior lights
on right away. Don't reach for your license. Keep your hands on the steering wheel.
Imagine having to worry like that every single time your kid got in a car. Here's what Tyree's
mother shared with me when I spoke to her, when I asked her how she finds the courage to carry on
and speak out. The faith of God, she said her son was, quote, a beautiful soul and something good
will come of this. Imagine how much courage and carry that takes. It's up to us, to all of us.
We all want the same thing, neighborhoods free of violence, law enforcement of enforcement who
earns the community's trust. Just as every cop when they pin on that badge in the morning has
a right to be able to go home at night, so does everybody else out there. Our children
have a right to come home safely. Equal protection under the law is a covenant
we have with each other in America.
We know police officers put their lives on the line every single night and day,
and we know we ask them in many cases to do too much to be counselors, social workers,
psychologists responding to drug overdoses, mental health crises, and so much more.
In one sense, we ask much too much of them. I know most cops and their families are good, decent,
honorable people, the vast majority. And they risk their lives every time they put that shield on.
But what happened to Tyree and Memphis happens too often. We have to do better. Give law enforcement
the real training they need. Hold them to higher standards. Help them succeed in keeping us safe.
We also need more first responders and professionals to address the growing
mental health and substance abuse challenges. More resources to reduce violent crime and gun crime.
More community intervention programs. More investment in housing, education, and job training.
All this can help prevent violence in the first place. When police officers
or police departments violate the public trust, they must be held accountable.
With the support
of the families of victims, civil rights groups, and law enforcement, I signed an executive order
for all federal officers banning chokeholds, restricting no-knock warrants, and other key
elements of the George Floyd Act. Let's commit ourselves to make the words of Tyler's mom
true. Something good must come from this. Something good.
And all of us.
All of us.
Folks, it's difficult but it's simple. All of us in this chamber. We need to rise to this moment.
We can't turn away. Let's do what we know in our hearts that we need to do.
Let's come together to finish the job on police reform. Do something. Do something. That was the
plea of parents who lost their children in Uvalde. I met with every one of them.
Do something about gun violence. Thank God. Thank God we did.
We did. Passing the most sweeping gun safety law in three decades.
That includes things like that the majority of responsible gun owners already support.
Enhanced background checks for 18 to 21 years old. Red flag laws keeping guns out of the hands
of people who are a danger to themselves and others. But we know our work is not done.
Join us tonight is Brandon Say, a 26-year-old hero. Brandon put his college dreams on hold
to be at his mom's side. His mom's side when she was dying from cancer.
Brandon now works at a dance studio started by his grandparents.
Two weeks ago during the Lunar New Year celebrations, he heard the studio door
close and he saw a man standing there pointing a semi-automatic pistol at him.
He thought he was going to die, but he thought about the people inside.
In that instant, he found the courage to act and wrestle the semi-automatic pistol
away from the gunman who had already killed 11 people in another dance studio.
11. He saved lives. It's time we do the same. Ban the assault weapons now. Ban them now.
Once and for all.
I led the fight to do that in 1994.
And in 10 years that ban was law, mass shootings went down.
After he let it expire in the Republican administration, mass shootings tripled.
Let's finish the job and ban these assault weapons.
And let's also come together on immigration. Make it a bipartisan issue once again.
We know we now have a record number of personnel working to secure the border,
arresting 8,000 human smugglers, seizing over 23,000 pounds of fentanyl in just the last
several months. We've launched a new border plan last month. Unlawful migration from Cuba,
Haiti, Nicaragua and Venezuela has come down 97 percent as a consequence of that.
But American border problems won't be fixed until Congress acts.
If we don't pass my comprehensive immigration reform,
at least pass my plan to provide the equipment and officers to secure the border.
And a pathway to citizenship for dreamers, those on temporary status, farm workers, essential
workers here in the people's house. It's our duty to protect all the people's rights and freedoms.
Congress must restore the right and the.
Congress must restore the right that was taken away in Roe v. Wade and protect Roe v. Wade.
The vice president and I are doing everything to get access to reproduction, health care
and safeguard patient safety, but already more than a dozen states are enforcing extreme
abortion bans. Make no mistake about it. If Congress passes a national ban, I will veto it.
But let's also pass. Let's also pass the Bipartisan Equality Act to ensure LGBT LGBTQ
Americans, especially transgender young people, can live with safety and dignity.
Our strength. Our strength is not just example of our power, but the power of our example.
Let's remember the world's watching. I spoke from this chamber one year ago, just days after
Vladimir Putin unleashed his brutal attack against Ukraine, a murderous assault, evoking images of
death and destruction Europe suffered in World War Two. Putin's invasion has been a test
for the ages, a test for America, a test for the world. Would we stand for the most basic
of principles? Would we stand for sovereignty? We stand for the right of people to live free
of tyranny. Would we stand for the defense of democracy for such defense matters to us
because it keeps peace and prevents open season? I would be aggressive and threatens our prosperity.
One year later, we know the answer. Yes, we would. And we did. We did.
And together, we did what America always does at our best. We led. We united NATO.
We built a global coalition. We stood against Putin's aggression. We stood with Ukrainian
people. Tonight, we're once again joined by Ukraine's ambassador to the United States.
She represents not just her nation, but the courage of her people.
Our ambassador is here. We're in united in our support of your country.
Will you stand so we can all take a look at you?
Thank you.
Because we're going to stand with you as long as it takes.
Our nation is working for more freedom, more dignity, more and more peace,
not just in Europe but everywhere. Before I came to office, the story was about
how the People's Republic of China was increasing its power and America was failing in the world.
Not anymore. We made clear, and I made clear in my personal conversations, which have been many,
with President Xi, that we seek competition, not conflict. But I will make no apologies
that we're investing to make America stronger, investing in American innovation in industries
that will define the future that China intends to be dominating, investing in our alliances
and working with our allies to protect advanced technologies so they will not be used against us,
modernizing our military to safeguard stability and deter aggression.
Today, we're in the strongest position in decades to compete with China or anyone else in the world.
Anyone else in the world. And I'm committed
to work with China where we can advance American interests and benefit the world. But make no
mistake about it. As we made clear last week, if China threatens our sovereignty,
we will act to protect our country. And we did.
Look, let's be clear. Winning the competition should deny all of us.
We face serious challenges across the world. But in the past two years, democracies have
become stronger, not weaker. Autocracies have grown weaker, not stronger. Name me a world leader
who changed places with Xi Jinping. Name me one. Name me one.
America is rallying the world to meet those challenges from climate to global health
to food insecurity to terrorism to territorial aggression.
Allies are stepping up, spending more and doing more. Look, the bridges we're forming between
partners in the Pacific and those in the Atlantic and those who bet against America are learning
how wrong they are. It's never, ever been a good bet to bet against America.
When I came to office, most assured that bipartisanship assumed was impossible,
but never believed it. That's why a year ago, I offered a unity agenda to the nation as I
stood here. We made real progress together. We passed the law making it easy for doctors
to prescribe effective treatments for opioid addiction. We passed the drug safety law,
making historic investments in mental health. We launched the ARPA-H drive for breakthrough
in the fights against cancer, Alzheimer's and diabetes, and so much more.
We passed the Heath Robinson Pact Act, named after the late Iraq war veteran's
story about exposure to toxic burn pits I shared here last year.
I understand something about those burn pits, but there's so much more to do.
We can do it together. Joining us tonight is a father named Doug from Newton, New Hampshire.
He wrote Jill, my wife, a letter, and me as well, about his courageous daughter, Courtney,
a contagious laugh, his sister's best friend, her sister's best friend. He shared a story
all too familiar to millions of Americans and many of you in the audience. Courtney discovered
pills in high school. It spiraled into addiction and eventually death from a fentanyl overdose.
She was just 20 years old. Describing the last eight years without her, Doug said,
there's no worse pain. Yet their family has turned pain to purpose, working to end the stigma
and change laws. He told us he wants to start a journey toward American recovery.
Doug, we're with you. Fentanyl is killing more than 70,000 Americans a year.
You got it.
So let's launch a major surge to stop fentanyl production in the sale and trafficking with
more drug detection machines, inspection, cargo, stop pills and powder at the border.
Working with curries like FedEx to inspect more packages for drugs,
strong penalties to crack down on fentanyl trafficking. Second, let's do more on mental
health, especially for our children. When millions of young people are struggling with bullying,
violence, trauma, we'll have greater access to mental health care at your schools.
We must finally hold social media companies accountable for experimenting or doing running
children for profit. It's time to pass bipartisan legislation to stop big tech from collecting
personal data on our kids and teenagers online. Then targeted advertising to children and impose
stricter limits on the personal data that companies collect on all of us. Third, let's do more to keep
this nation's ones truly sacred obligation to equip those we send into harm's way and care for
them and their families when they come home. Job training, job placement for veterans and their
spouses as they come to return to civilian life, helping veterans afford the rent because no one
should be homeless in America, especially someone who served the country. Dennis McDonough is here
of the VA. We had our first real discussion when I asked him to take the job. I'm glad he did.
We were losing up to 25 veterans a day on suicide. Now we're losing 17 a day to the silent scourge
of suicide. 17 veterans a day are committing suicide, more than all the people being killed
in the wars. Folks, VA is doing everything it can, including expanding mental health screening,
proven programs that recruits veterans to help other veterans understand what they're going
through, get them the help they need. We've got to do more. And fourth, last year Jill and I
reignited the cancer moonshot that I was able to start with. President Obama asked me to lead our
administration on this issue. Our goal is to cut the cancer death rates at least by 50 percent in
the next 25 years, turn more cancer from death sentences to treatable diseases,
provide more support for patients and their families. It's personal to so many of us,
so many of us in this audience. Joining us are Morris and Candice, an Irishman and a daughter
of immigrants from Panama. They met and fell in love in New York City and got married in the same
chapel as you and I got married in New York City. Kindred spirits. He wrote us a letter
about his little daughter, Ava, and I saw her just before I came over. She was just a year old when
she was diagnosed with rare kidney disease, cancer. After 26 blood transfusions, 11 rounds
of radiation, eight rounds of chemo, one kidney removed, give it a five percent survival rate.
He wrote how in the darkest moments he thought, if she goes, I can't stay. Many of you have been
through that as well. Jill and I understand that like so many of you. He read Jill's book
describing our family's cancer journey and how we tried to steal moments of joy where we could
with Beau. For them, that glimmer of joy was the half smile of their baby girl. It meant everything
to them. They never gave up hope. Little Ava never gave up hope. She turns four next month.
They just found out Ava's beating the odds, is on her way to being cured of cancer.
And she's watching from the White House tonight as she's not asleep already.
For the lives we can say, for the lives we can say and the lives we've lost,
let's just be a truly American moment that rallies the country and the world together
and prove that we can still do big things. 20 years ago, under the leadership of President Bush
and countless advocates and champions, he undertook a bipartisan effort through PEPFAR
to transform the global fight against HIV AIDS. It's been a huge success. He thought big. He
thought large. He moved. I believe we can do the same thing with cancer.
Let's end cancer as we know it. Cure some cancers once and for all.
Folks, there's one reason why we've been able to do all of these things,
our democracy itself. It's the most fundamental thing of all. With democracy, everything's
possible. Without it, nothing is. The last few years, our democracy has been threatened and
attacked, put at risk, put to the test in this very room on January the 6th. And then just a
few months ago, an unhinged big lie, a sale and unleash to political violence, the home of the
then speaker of the House of Representatives, using the very same language insurrectionists
used as they stalked these halls and chanted on January 6th.
Here tonight in this chamber is a man who bears the scars of that brutal attack,
but is as tough and as strong, as resilient as they get. My friend, Paul Pelosi. Paul, stand up.
But such a heinous act should have never happened. We must all speak out. There's no place for
political violence in America. We have to protect the right to vote, not suppress the
fat fundamental right. Honor the results of our elections, not subvert the will of the people.
We have to uphold the rule of law and restore trust in our institutions of democracy.
We must give hate and extremism in any form, no safe harbor.
Democracy must not be a partisan issue. It's an American issue.
Every generation of Americans face the moment where they have been called to protect our
democracy, defend it, stand up for it. And this is our moment. My fellow Americans,
we meet tonight at an inflection point, one of those moments that only a few generations ever
face, where the direction we now take is going to decide the course of this nation for decades to
come. We're not bystanders of history. We're not powerless before the forces that confront us.
It's within our power of we, the people. We're facing the test of our time.
We have to be the nation we've always been at our best, optimistic, hopeful, forward-looking,
a nation that embraces light over dark, hope over fear, unity over division, stability over chaos.
We have to see each other, not as enemies, but as fellow Americans.
We're good people. The only nation in the world built on an idea. The only one.
Other nations are defined by geography, ethnicity, but we're the only nation based on an idea
that all of us, every one of us is created equal in the image of God,
a nation that stands as a beacon of the world, a nation in a new age of possibilities.
So I've come to fulfill my constitutional obligation to report in the State of the Union,
and here's my report. Because the soul of this nation is strong,
because the backbone of this nation is strong, because the people of this nation are strong,
the State of the Union is strong.
I'm not new to this place. I stand here tonight, having served as long as about any one of you
have ever served here. But I've never been more optimistic about our future,
about the future of America. We just need to remember who we are. We're the United
States of America, and there's nothing, nothing beyond our capacity if we do it together.
God bless you all. May God protect our troops.