Mr. Speaker, Mountain Vice President, our first lady and second gentleman, Good to see you guys up there. Members of Congress. By the way, chief does is I may need a court order. She gets to go to the the game tomorrow, next week, I gotta have to stay home. Gotta work something out here. Members of the cabinet, leaders of our military chief justice associate justice and retired justice at Supreme Court, and to you, my fellow Americans. You know, a start tonight by congratulating 118th Congress, and the new speaker of the house, Kevin McCarthy. Speaker, I don't wanna ruin your reputation, but I look forward to working with you. And I want to congratulate the new leader of the House Democrats, the 1st African American minority leader in history Hakim Jefferies. He won't inspire the fact I campaign for him. Congratulations. The longest serving leader in the history of the United States Senate Mitch McConnell, worried of Mitch. And congratulations to Chuck Schumer, another you know, another term is senate minority leader, you know, I think you, Oh, this time you have a slightly bigger majority, Mister Leader, you're not a majority leader. About that much bigger? Yeah. Well, I'll tell you what, I wanna give speckle rec special recognition to someone who I think is gonna be considered the greatest speaker in the history of the house of representative Nancy Pelosi. Folks The story of America is a story of progress and resilience. I'm always moving forward of never ever giving up. It's a story unique among all nations. We're the only country that has emerged from every crisis we've ever entered stronger than we got into it. Look, folks. That's what we're doing again. 2 years ago, the economy is reeling. I stand here tonight after we've created with the help of many people in this room, 12,000,000 new jobs. More jobs created in 2 years than any presence created in 4 years. because of you all, because of the merits of people. 2 years ago, In 2 years ago, COVID had shut down. Our businesses were closed. Our schools were robbed of so much. And today, COVID no longer controls our lives. And 2 years ago, democracy faced this greatest threat to the civil war and today, though bruised our democracy remains unbowed and unbroken. as we gather here tonight, we're writing the next chapter in the Great American story, a story of progress and resilience. When world leaders asked me to define America and they do believe it or not, I said I can define it in one word, and I mean this possibilities We don't think anything is beyond our capacity. Everything is a possibility. You know, we're often told that Democrats and Republicans can't work together. But over the past 2 years, we've proved the cynics and naysayers wrong. Yes. We disagreed plenty. And yes, there were times when Democrats went alone. But time and again, Democrats and Republicans came together. came together to defend a stronger and safer euro. It came together to pass 1 in a gen 1 in a generation, once in generation infrastructure law, building bridges connecting our nation and our people. We came together to pass the most significant law ever, helping victims expose the toxic burn pits. And in fact, is important. And in fact, I signed over 300 bipartisan pieces of legislation since becoming president from reauthorizing the violence against women act. the Electoral Count Reform Act, the respect for marriage act that protects the right to marry the person you love. And to my Republican friends, We could work together the last congress. There's no reason we can't work together and find consensus on important things in this congress as well. I think Folks. You all are just formed as I am, but I think that people sent us a clear message. fighting for the sake of fighting. Power for the sake of power conflict for the sake of conflict gets us nowhere. That's always been my vision of our country and I know it's many of yours to restore the soul of this nation to rebuild the backbone of America. America's middle class and to unite the country. We've been sent here to finish the job in my view. For decades, the middle class has been hollowed out. and more than and not know one administration, but for a long time, too many good paying manufacturing jobs move overseas. Factories closed down. Once thriving cities and towns that many of you represent became shadows of what they used to be. and along the way, something else we lost, pride, our sense of self worth. I ran for president to fundamentally change things. to make sure our economy works for everyone so we can all feel that pride in what we do. To build an economy from the bottom up in the middle out, not from the top down. Because when the middle class does well, the poor have a ladder up and the wealthy still do very well. We all do well. I know a lot of you always kid me for always quoting my dad, but my dad used to say Joey at Jobs about a lot more than a paycheck. He really would say this. It's about a lot more in the paycheck. It's about your dignity. It's about respect. It's about being able to look at your kid in the eye and say, honey, It's gonna be okay and mean it. Well, folks, so let's look at the results. We're not finished yet. by any stretch of imagination, but unemployment rate is at 3.4% of 50 year low. a near record, a near record unemployment. near record unemployment for black and Hispanic workers. We've already created your help 800,000 good paying manufacturing jobs. the fastest growth in 40 years. And where is it written? Where is it written that America can't lead the world in manufacturing? And I don't know where that's written. For too many decades, we imported projects and exported jobs. Now thanks to what you've all done. We're exporting American products and creating American jobs. Folks, Inflation. Inflation has been a global problem because pandemic disrupted our supply chains and Putin's unfair and brutal war in Ukraine. disrupted energy supplies as well as food supplies blocking all that grain in Ukraine, but we're in better position any country on Earth right now. But we have more to do, but here at home, inflation is coming down. Here at home gas prices are down a dollar 50s from their peak. Food inflation is coming down, not fasten up, but coming down. Inflation has fallen every month for the last 6 months, or take home pay has gone up. Additionally, over the last 2 years, a record 10,000,000 Americans applied to start new businesses, 10,000,000. And by the way, every time Every time someone starts and small business is an act of hope. And Madam Vice President, I want to thank you for leading that effort to ensure the small businesses have access to capital and the historic laws we enacted that are gonna just come into being. Standing here last year, I shared with you a story of American Genius And Possibilities, Semiconductors, Small computer chips, the size of a fingerprint that power everything from cell phones to automobiles and so much more These chips were invented in America. Let's get that straight. They were invented in America. Can we use to make 40% of the world's chips in the last several decades we lost our edge were down only producing 10%. We all saw what happened during the pandemic when chip factories shut down overseas. Today's automobiles need 3000 chips each of those automobiles. But American automobiles couldn't make enough cars because there weren't enough chips. Car prices went up. People got laid off. So did everything from refrigerators to cell phones? We can never let that happen again. That's why That's why we came together to pass the bipartisan chips and science act. I know I've been criticized for saying this, but I'm not changing my view. We're gonna make sure the supply chain for America begins in America. The supply chain begins in America. We already created We've already created 800,000 new manufacturing jobs without this law before the law get kicks in. With this new law, we're gonna create 100 of 1000 of new jobs across the country and mean all across the country. throughout not just the coast, but through the middle of the country as well. That's gonna come from companies that have announced more than 3 $100,000,000,000 in investment in American Manufacturing over the next few years. Outside of Columbus, Ohio, intel is building a semiconductor factories on a 1000 acres, literally a field of dreams, It's gonna create 10,000 jobs at one investment, 7000 construction jobs, 3000 jobs, in those factories once they're finished. They call them factories. Jobs paying an average of $130,000 a year. and many do not require a college degree. Jobs Because we work together, these jobs where people don't have to leave home to search for opportunity, It's just getting started. Think about the new homes, the small businesses, the big, the medium sized businesses. So much more that's going to be needed to support those 3 thou those 3000 permanent jobs and the factories that are gonna be built. Talk to mayors and governors, Democrats, Republicans, and they'll tell you what this means for their communities. We're seeing these field of dreams transform into the heartland. But to maintain the strongest economy in the world, we need the best infrastructure in the world. And, folks, as you all know, we used to be number 1 in the world in infrastructure. We've sunk to 13th in the world. The United States of America, 13th in the world in infrastructure, modern infrastructure. But now we're coming back because we came together and passed the bipartisan infrastructure law. The largest investment infrastructure since president Eisauer's interstate highway system. Already we've we've funded over 20,000 projects, including major airports from Boston to Atlanta, Portland. projects, and we're gonna put thousands of people to work rebuilding our highways, our bridges, our railroads, our tunnels, ports, airports, clean water, high speed internet, all across America. Urban, rural, tribal. And folks, we're just getting started. We're just getting started. And I mean it sincerely. I wanna thank my Republican friends who voted for the law. I'm a Republican friends who voted against it as well, but I'm still, I, I still get asked to fund the projects in those districts as well, but don't worry. I promised I'd be a president for all Americans. We'll fund these projects, and I'll see you at the groundbreaking. Look. This law This law will further unite all of America. Projects like Brent Spend Bridge in Kentucky over their Ohio River built 60 years ago, badly needed repairs. 1 of the nation's most congested freight routes carrying $2,000,000,000 worth of freight every single day across the Ohio River. And folks have been talking about fixing it for decades, but we're really finally gonna get it done. I went there last month, with Democrats and Republicans and from both states to deliver a commitment of $1,600,000,000 for this project. And while I was there, I met a young woman named Sarah, Who's here tonight? I don't know where Sarah is. Is she up in the box? I don't know. Sarah, how are you? Well, Sarah, for 30 years. For 30 years, I learned she told me she'd been a proud member of the ironworkers local 44. known as known as the Cowboys in the sky. The folks who built built Cincinnati Skyline Sir said she can't wait to be ten stories above the Ohio River building that new bridge. God bless her. That's pride. And that's what we're also building. We're building back pride. Look, we're also replacing poisons led pipes that go into 10,000,000 homes in America. 400,000 school and childcare centers. So every child in America, every child in work can drink the water. instead of having permanent damage to their brain. Look, we're making sure We're making sure that every community, every community in America has access to affordable high speed Internet, no parent should have to drive by McDonald's parking lot to help to do their phone work online or their kids, which many thousands were doing across the country. And when we do these projects and, again, I get criticized for this, but I make no excuses for it. We're gonna buy American I'm gonna buy America. and it's totally it's totally consistent with international trade rules. Buy America has been the law since 1933. but for too long past administrations, democrat and Republican have fought to get around it. Not anymore. tonight, I'm announcing new standards that require all construction materials using federal infrastructure projects to be made in I mean, Glass, drywall, fiber optic cable. And on my watch, American roads, Bridges American highways are gonna be made with American products as well. Folks my economic plan is about investing in places and people that have been forgotten. So many of you listening to me tonight, I know you feel it. So many of you felt like you've just simply been forgotten. I made the act I gotta make up people over the past 4 decades. Too many people have been left behind and treated like they're invisible. Maybe that's you watching from home. Remember the jobs that went away. You remember them. Don't you? Yes. The folks at home remember them. You wonder whether the path even exists anymore. for your children to get ahead without having to move away. Well, that's why I get that. That's why we're building an economy where no one's left behind. Jobs are coming back. Pride is coming back. because choices we made in the last several years. You know, this is my view of blue collar blueprint to rebuild America. make a real difference in your lives at home. For example, too many of you Laying bed at night like my dad did, staring at the ceiling, wondering what in god names happens if his if your spouse gets cancer or your child gets deadly ill or something happens to you, what are you gonna have, you know, money to pay for those medical bills? Or you're gonna have to sell the house or try to get a second mortgage on it. I get it. I get it. In the inflation reduction act that I signed in law, we're taking on powerful interest to bring health care costs down so you can sleep better at night. with more security. You know, we pay more for prescription drugs than any nation in the world. We say it again. We pay more for prescription drugs than any major nation on earth. For example, 1 of 10 Americans has diabetes, many of you in this chamber do and then the audience. But every day, millions need insulin to control their diabetes so they can literally stay alive. Instinet's been around for over a 100 years. The guy in a minute didn't even patent him because he wanted to be available for everyone. It costs the drug companies roughly $10 a vial to make that insulin. Packaging it all, you may get up to $13. But big pharma has been unfairly charging people 100 of dollars, 4 to $500 a month, making record re record profits. Not anymore. Not anymore. So so many things that we did are only now coming to fruition. We said we were doing this, and we said we passed the law to do it. But people didn't know because the law didn't take effect until January 1 this year. We capped the cost of insulin at $35 a month for seniors on Medicare. people are just finding out. I'm sure you're getting the same calls I'm getting. Look, there are millions of other Americans who do not or are not a Medicare, including 200,000 young people with type 1 diabetes need this need this insulin to stay alive. Let's finish the job this time. Let's count the cost of insulin for everybody at $35. Folks. The big former is still gonna do very well. I promise y'all. I promise you they're gonna do very well. This law so this law also caps and won't even go into effect until 2025. costs, out of pocket drug costs for seniors on Medicare at a maximum of $2000 a year. You don't have to pay more than 2000 no matter how much your drug costs are. Because you know why? You all know it. Many of you, like many in my family, have cancer, You know, the drugs can range from 10, 11, 14, 15,000 for the cancer drugs. If drug prices rise faster than inflation, drug companies are gonna have to pay Medicare back the difference. And finally, And finally, giving Medicare the power to negotiate drug prices, bringing down bringing down prescription drug costs doesn't just save senior's money. It cuts the federal deficit by 1,000,000,000 of dollars, by 100 of 1,000,000,000 of dollars. Because these prescription drugs are drugs purchased by Medicare to make keep their commitments to the seniors. Well, guess what? Instead of paying 400 or 500 bucks a month, you're paying 15. That's a lot of savings for the federal government. And by the way, why wouldn't we want that? Now some members here are threatening, and I know it's not a official party position. So I'm not gonna exaggerate. but certainly to repeal the inflation reduction act. As my coach that's okay. That's fair. as my football coach used to say, lots of luck in your senior year. Make no mistake. If you try anything to raise the cost of Brazilian jobs, I will veto it. I'm pleased to say the more Americans held for the health insurers now than ever in history. A record 16 million people are enrolled in the Affordable Care Act And thanks, thanks for the law I signed last year, saving 1,000,000 of saving $800 a year on their premiums. And by the way, that law was written, and the benefit expires in 2025. So my plea to some of you, at least in this audience, Let's finish the job and make these savings permanent. Expand coverage on Medicaid. Mark. The inflation reduction act is also the most significant investment ever in climate change, ever. lower utility bill, creating American job, leading the world to a clean energy future. I visited the devastating aftermath of record floods, droughts, storms, and wildfires from Arizona and New Mexico to all the way up to the Canadian border. more timber has been burned than I've observed from helicopters than the entire state of Missouri. And we don't have global warming. Not a problem. In addition to emergency recovery from Puerto Rico to Florida to Idaho, we're rebuilding for the long term. new electric grids that are able to weather major storms and not prevent those fire forest fires. Rhoads and water systems will stay in the next big flood. clean energy to cut pollution and create jobs and communities often left behind. We're gonna build 500,000 electric vehicle charging stations installed that'll cross the country by tens of 1000 IBW workers. And we're helping families save more than the $1000 year with tax credits to purchase electric vehicles and efficient and efficient appliances, energy efficient appliances, historic conservation efforts to be responsible stewards of our land. Let's face reality. The climate crisis doesn't care if you're in a red or blue state. It's an existential threat. We have an obligation not to ourselves, but to our children and grandchildren to confront it. I'm proud of how the how America At last is stepping up to the challenge. We're still gonna need oil and gas for a while, but guess what? No. We do. But there's so much more to do. We gotta finish the job. And we pay for these investments in our future by finally making the wealthiest and biggest corporations begin to pay their fair share. Let's begin. Montgomery Catalyst, I'm a capitalist, but pay your fair share. I think a lot of you at home. A lot of you at home agree with me and many people that you know The tax system is not fair. It is not fair. The idea that in 2020, 55 of the largest corporations in America, the Fortune 500, made $40,000,000,000 in profits and paid 0 in federal taxes? 0. Folks. It's simply not fair. But now because of the law I signed, $1,000,000,000 companies have to pay a minimum of 15%. God love them. 15%. That's less than the last page. When I give you crystal clear, I said at the very beginning, under my plans, as long as I'm president, nobody earning than $400,000 will pay an additional penny in taxes. Nobody, not one penny. But let's finish the job. There's more to do. We have to reward work, not just wealth, passed my proposal for the billionaire minimum tax. You know, there's a 1000 billionaires in Americans up from about 600 in the beginning of the term. But no billionaire should be paying a lower tax rate than a school teacher or firefighter. I mean it. Think about it. I know you're enthusiastic about that, but think about it. Think about it. Have you noticed Big Oil just reported as profits, record profits? Last year, they made 2 $100,000,000,000 in the midst of a global energy crisis. I think it's outrageous. why they invested too little of that profit increased domestic production. And when I talked to a couple of them, they say, we're afraid you're gonna shut down all the oil wells and all the oil refineries anyway. So why should we invest in them? I said, we're gonna need oil for at least another decade. and not gonna exceed it. And beyond that, we're gonna need it. Production. If they had, in fact, invested in the production to keep gas prices down, instead, they used the record profits to buy back their own stock. rewarding to CEOs and shareholders. Corporations ought to do the right thing. That's why I propose we quadruple attacks on corporate stock buybacks and occurs long, long term investments. They'll still make a shit of a profit. Let's finish the job and close the loopholes allow very wealthy to avoid paying their taxes. Instead of cutting the number of audits for wealthy taxpayers, I just signed a law to reduce the deficit by $114,000,000,000 by cracking down on wealthy tax sheets. That's being fiscally responsible. In the last two years, My administration has cut the deficit by more than $1,700,000,000,000. The largest deficit reduction in American history. Under the previous administration, the American deficit went up 4 years in a row because those record deficits no president added more than the national debt in any 4 years than my predecessor. Nearly 25% of the entire national debt that took over 200 years to accumulate was added by just one administration alone, the last one. They're the facts. Check it Check it out. How did Congress respond to that debt? They did the right thing. They lifted the debt ceiling three times without preconditions or crisis. They paid American bills to prevent an economic disaster So tonight, I'm asking the Congress to follow suit. Let's commit here tonight to the full faith that credit of the United States America will never ever be questioned. So my many some of my Republican friends wanna take the economy hostage. I get it. unless I agree to their economic plans. All of you at home should know what those plans are. Instead of making the wealthy pay their fair share, some Republicans, some Republicans want Medicare and Social Security it. I'm not saying it's a majority. Let me give you anybody who contact my office. I'll give you a copy. I'll give you a copy of the proposal. That means Congress doesn't move. Well, I'm glad to see, and I'll tell you, I'm I enjoy conversion. You know, it means if if Congress doesn't keep the programs the way they are, they'd go away. Other Republicans say, I'm not saying it's a majority of you. I don't even think it's even a significantly, but it's being proposed by individuals. I'm not, fillet me not naming them, but it's being proposed by some of you. Look, folks. The idea is that we're not gonna be we're we're not gonna be moved into being threatened to default on the debt if we don't respond. folks. So, folks, as we all apparently agree, Social Security Medicare is off the off the books now, right, right, not to be strong? Alright. I'm ready. We got unanimity. So screen Medicare are lifeline for millions of seniors. Americans have to pay into them from the very first paycheck they started. So tonight, let's all agree, and we currently are, let's stand up for seniors. stand up and show them. We'll not cut Social Security. We will not cut Medicare. Those benefits belong to the American people that earned it. And if anyone tries to cut social security, which apparently no one's gonna do, If anyone tries to accept Medicare, I'll stop them. I'll veto it. But I'm not gonna allow them to take away, be taken away, not today, not tomorrow, not ever, but apparently, it's not gonna be a problem. Next month, when I offered my fiscal plan, I asked my Republican friends to lay down their plan as well. I really mean it. Let's sit down together and discuss our mutual plans together. Let's do that. I can tell you. The plan I'm gonna show you is gonna cut the deficit by another $2,000,000,000,000. and I won't cut a single bit of Medicare or self security. In fact, we're gonna extend the Medicare trust fund at least 2 decades. that's gonna be the next argument. How do we make keep it solvent? Right? Well, we'll not raise tax anyone making under 400 gram, but will pay for it the way we talked about it, you know, by making sure that the wealthy and big corporations pay their fresh air. Look. Look. Look. Here here's the deal. They're not just taking advantage of the tax code. They're taking advantage of you, the American consumer. Here's my message to all of you out there. I have your back. We're already preventing Americans receiving surprise medical bills, stopping $1,000,000,000 surprise bills per month so far. for protecting senior's life savings by cracking down and nursing homes, a commit fraud, endanger patient safety prescribed drugs that are not needed. Minutes of Americans can now save 1000 of dollars because they can finally get a hearing aid over the counter without a prescription. Look, Capitalism, Without competition is not capitalism. It's extortion. It's exploitation. Last year, I cracked down with the help of many of you on foreign shipping companies that were making you pay higher prices for every good coming into the country. I signed a bipartisan bill to cut shipping costs by 90%, helping American farmers, businessmen, and consumers. Let's finish the job. passed the bipartisan legislation and strengthened strength and antitrust enforcement and for beg and prevent big online platforms giving their own products an unfair advantage. My administration is also taking on junk fees. Those hidden surcharges too many companies use to make you pay more. For example, we're making airlines show you the full ticket price up front. Refund your money if your flight is canceled or delayed. We've reduced exorbitant bank overdrafts by saving consumers more than $1,000,000,000 a year. for cutting credit card late fees by 75 percent from $30 to $8. Look, junk fees may not mattered it very wealthy, but they mattered to most other folks in homes like the one I grew up in, like many of you did. They add up to 100 of dollars a month They make it hard for you to pay your bills and afford that family trip. I know how unfair it feels when a company overcharges you and gets away with it. Not anymore, we've written a bill to stop at all. It's called the junk fee prevention act. We're gonna ban surprise resort fees. That hotels charge on your on your bill. Those fees can cost up to $90 a night at hotels that aren't even resorts. We the idea that cable, internet, and cell phone companies can charge you 200 or more if you decide to switch another provider. Give me a break. We can stop service fees on tickets to concerts and sporting events and make companies just close all the fees up front. and will prohibit airlines from charging $50 round trip for family just to be able to sit together. Baggies fees are bad enough. Airlines can't treat your child like a piece of baggies. Americans are tired of being they're tired of being played for suckers. So past past the Jump Tree Prevention Act, so companies stop ripping us off. For too long, workers have been getting stiffed, but not anymore, we're getting be we're beginning to restore the dignity of work. For example, I I I should have known this, but I didn't until 2 years ago. 30,000,000 workers have to sign non compete agreements with the jobs they take. 30,000,000. So a cashier at a burger place can't walk across town and take the same job in other burger place to make a few bucks more. It just changed it, but I just changed it because we exposed it. That was part of the deal, guys. Look it up. But not anymore. For Benny nose agreements, companies have to compete for workers and pay them what And I must tell you, this is bound together in response to my friends, on my left, with the right. I'm so sick and tired of companies breaking the law by preventing workers from organizing. Past the pro act. because business have a right. Workers have a right to form a union. Let's guarantee all workers have a living wage. Let's make sure working parents can afford to raise a family with sick days. paid family medical leave. Affordable child care. That's gonna enable minutes of more people to go and stay at work, and let's restore the full child tax credit. which gave tens of millions of parents some breathing room and cut child poverty and a half to the lowest level in history. And by the way, When we do all these things, we increase productivity. We increase economic growth. So let's finish the job. and get more families access to affordable quality housing. Let's get seniors who wanna stay in their homes, the care they need to do so. Let's get more breathing room to millions of family caregivers looking after their loved ones. Past my plan, So we get seniors and people with disabilities, the home care, and services they need, and support the workers who are doing god's work These plans are fully paid for, and we can afford to do them. Restoring the dignity of work means making education an affordable ticket to the middle class. You know, when we made public education, 12 years of it universal in the last century, We made the best educated, best paid. We became the best educated, best paid nation in the world. The rest of the world's caught up. It's caught up. Jill, my wife who teaches full time has an expression. I hope I get it right, kid. Any nation is out educates us is gonna outcompete us. Any nation out educate is gonna outcompete us. Folks, we all know 12 years of education. is not enough to win the economic competition of 21st century. We wanna have the best educated workforce. Let's finish the job. While providing access to preschool, for three and four years old, studies show that children who go to preschool are nearly 50% more likely to finish high school and go on to earn a 2 or 4 year degree. No matter their background they came from. Let's get public school teachers a raise. We're making progress by reducing student debt, increasing Pell Grants for working in middle class families. Let's finish the job. and connect students to career opportunities starting in high school, provide access to 2 years of community college, the best career training in American addition to be a pathway to a 4 year degree. Let's offer every American a path to a good free, whether they go to college or not. The folks folks in the midst of the COVID crisis, when schools were closed, and we were shutting down everything. Let's recognize how far we came in the fight against the pandemic itself. While the virus is not gone, thanks to the resilience of the American people and the ingenuity of medicine. We've broken the COVID grip on us. COVID deaths are down by 90%. We've saved 1,000,000 of lives and opened up our country. We opened our country back up. and soon we'll end the public health emergency. But that's called a public health emergency. But we'll remember a toll and pain that's never gonna go away. More than a 1,000,000 Americans lost their lives to COVID. a 1,000,000, families grieving, children, and orphan, empty chairs of the dining room table constantly reminding you. and she used to sit there. Remembering them. We remain vigilant. We still need to monitor dozens of variants and support new vaccines and treatments. So Congress needs to fund these efforts and keep America safe. And as we emerge from this crisis, stronger, we're also gotta double down on prosecuting criminals who stole relief money meant to keep workers in small businesses afloat. Before I came to office, you remember during that campaign, the big issue was about Inspector generals. who would protect taxpayers' dollars on the sideline. They were fired. Many people said we don't need them. and fraud became rampant. Last year, I told you the watchdogs are back. Since then, Since then, we've recovered 1,000,000,000 of taxpayers dollars. Now let's triple the anti fraud strike force going after these criminals double the statute of limitations on these kinds and crack down on identity fraud by criminal syndicates stealing 1,000,000,000 of dollars. 1,000,000,000 of dollars from the American people and the data shows that for every dollar we put in a fighting fraud, the tax rate get back at least ten times as much. It matters. It matters. Look, COVID lifted scars like the spike in violent crime in 2020, the 1st year of the pandemic. We have an obligation to make sure all people are safe. Public safety depends on public trust as all of us know. but too often that trust is violated. Join us tonight are the parents of Tyre Nichols Welcome. I had to bear Tyree last week. As many of you personally know, there's no word to describe the heartache or brief of losing a child. But imagine imagine if you lost that child at the hands of the law. Imagine having to worry whether your son or daughter came home from walking down the street or playing in the park or just driving a car. Most of us in here have never had to have the talk, the talk that Brown and Black parents have had to have with their children. bow, Hunter, Ashley, my children. I never had to have the talk on them. I never had to tell them if a police officer pulls you over, turn your interior lights on right away. Don't reach for your license. Keep your hands on the steering wheel. Imagine having a worry like that every single time. Your kid got in a car. Here's her Tyre's mother shared with me when I spoke to her. When I asked her how she finds the courage to carry on and speak out. The faith of god, she said her son was, quote, a beautiful soul, and something good will come of this. imagine how much courage and carry that takes. It's up to us to all of us. We all want the same thing. Neighbridge free of violence. Sure. Law enforcement of enforcement who earns the community's trust. Just as every cop when they pin on that badge in the morning has a right to be able to go home at night. So does everybody else out there? Our children have a right to come home safely. Equal protection under the law as a covenant we have with each other in America. We know police officers put their lives on the line every single night and day. And we know we asked them in many cases to do too much to be counselors, social workers, psychologists responding to drug overdoses, mental health crises, and so much more. one sense, we ask much too much of them. I know most cops and their families are good, decent, honorable people of the vast majority. They risk. And they risk their lives every time they put that shield on. But what happened to Tyre in Memphis happens too often? We have to do better. Give law enforcement the real training they need. hold them to higher standards, help them succeed in keeping it safe. We also need more first responders and professionals to address the growing mental health substance abuse challenges. More resources reduce violent crime and gun crimes. More community intervention programs. more investment in housing, education, and job training. All this to help prevent violence in the first place. When police officers or police departments violate the public trust, they must be held accountable. With the support of the families of victims, civil rights groups and law enforcement, I signed an executive order for all federal officers banning choke holds, restricting no knock warrants, and other key elements of the George Floyd Act. Let's commit ourselves to make the words of Tyler's mom true. something good must come from this. Yeah. Something good. And all of us All of us. Folks is difficult, but it's simple. All of us in the cha in this chamber. We need to rise to this moment. We can't turn away. Let's do what we know in our hearts that we need to do. Let's come together to finish the job. I'll please inform. Do something. Do something. That was the plea of parents who lost their children, Uvalde. I met with every one of them. Do something about gun violence. Thank god. Thank god we did. Pasting the most sweeping gun safety law in 3 decades. That includes things like that the majority of responsible gun owners already support enhanced background checks for 18 to 21 years old, red flag laws, keeping guns out of the hands of people who are a danger to themselves and others. But we know our work is not done. Joining us tonight is Brandon Sey, a twenty six year old hero. Brandon put his college dreams on hold to beat his mom's side. His mom's side when she was dying from cancer. And Brandon. Brandon now works at the dance studio, certified grandparents. And 2 weeks ago, During the lunar New Year celebrations, you heard the studio door close, and you saw a man standing there pointing semi automatic pistol at him. He thought he was going to die, but he thought about the people inside. And that incident found the courage to act and wrestle the semiautomatic pistol away from the gunman who had already killed eleven people in another dance studio. Eleven. He saved lives. It's time we do the same. Band us all weapons now. and then now. I love the fight to do that in 1994. In in 10 years, that ban was law. I'm shootings went down. After we let it expire in the Republican administration, mass shootings tripled. Let's finish the job and ban these assault weapons. And let's also come together on immigration. Make it a bipartisan issue once again. We know we now have a record number of personnel working to secure the border. arresting 8000 human smugglers seizing over \u00a323,000 of fentanyl in just the last several months. We've launched a new border plan last month on lawful migration from Cuba, Haiti, Nicaragua, and Venezuela has come down 97% as a consequence of that. But American border problems won't be fixed until Congress acts. If we don't pass my comprehensive immigration reform, at least pass my plan to provide the equipment and officers to secure the border. And a pathway to citizenship for dreamers Those on temporary status, farm workers, essential workers. Here in the people's house, it's our duty to protect all the people's rights and freedoms. Congress must restore the right and the Congress must restore the right. I was taken away in Roe V Wade and protect Roe V Wade. You've had me over the counter. Right? The vice president and I are doing everything to protect access to reproductions, health care, and safeguard patient safety. Well, already, more than a dozen states are enforcing extreme abortion bans. Make no mistake about it. If Congress passes a national ban, I will veto it. But let's also pass. It's also passed the bipartisan equality act. I'm sure LPG LGBTQ Americans, especially transgender young people. can live with safety and dignity. Our strength Our strength is not just the example of our power, but the power of our example. Let's remember the world's watching. I spoke from this chamber 1 year ago just days after Vladimir Putin unleashed his brutal attack against Ukraine, a murderous assault, Voking images of death and destruction. Europe suffered in World War II. Putin's invasion has been a test for the ages. Test for America. Test for the world. Would we stand for the most basic of principles? Will we stand for sovereignty? We stand for the right of people to live free of charity? Will we stand for the defense of democracy? For such defense matters to us because it keeps peace and prevents open season. I'm would be aggressive and threatens our prosperity. 1 year later, we know the answer. Yes. We would, and we did. We did. And together, We did what America always does at our best. We led. We unite in NATO. We build a global coalition. We stood against Putin's aggression. We stood with Ukrainian people to deny. We're once again joined by the Ukrainian ambassador to the United States. She represents not her and just her nation, but the courage of her people ambassador is our ambassador is here. United and we're in United and our support of your country. Will you stand so we can all take a look at you? Thank you. is we're gonna stand with you as long as it takes. Our nation's working for more freedom, more dignity, more and more peace not just in Europe and everywhere. Before I came to office, the story was about how the people's republic of China was increasing its power. and America's failing in the world. Not anymore. We made clear, and I may give you my personal conversation, which have been many. with President Xi, that we seek competition, not conflict, but I will make no apologies that we're investing and to make America stronger. Investing American Innovation And Industries will define the future that China intends to be dominating. investing in our alliances and working with our allies to protect advanced technologies so they will not be used against us. modernizing our military to safeguard stability and determine to to tear aggression. Today, We're the strongest position in decades to compete with China or anyone else in the world. Anyone else in the world. not committed. I'm committed to work with China where we can advance American interests and benefit the world, but make no mistake about it as we made clear last week. If China threatens our sovereignty, we will act to protect our country, and we did. Look. Let's be clear. When in the competition should unite all of us? We face serious challenges across the world. But in the past 2 years, democracies have become stronger, not weaker. democracy has grown weaker, not stronger. name me a world leader who changed places with Xi Jinping. Name me 1. Name me 1. America's rallying the world to meet those challenges from climate to global health, to food insecurity, to terrorism, to territorial aggression, allies are stepping up spending more and doing more. Look. The bridges were forming between partners in the Pacific and those in the Atlanta And those who bet against America are learning how wrong they are. It's never ever been a good bet to bet against America. Never. Well, When I came to office, most assured that bipartisanship assumed was impossible. but never believed it. That's why a year ago, I offered a unity agenda to the nation as I stood here. We made real progress together. We passed the law and make it easy for doctors to prescribe effective treatments for opioid addiction. We passed The gun safety law making historic investments in mental health. We launched the ARPA H drive for breakthrough in the fights against cancer Alzheimer's and diabetes. and so much more. We passed the Heath Robinson Pact named after the late Iraq war veteran news story about exposure the toxic burn kits I shared here last year. I understand something about those burn pits, but there's so much more to do We can do it together. Joining us tonight is a father named Doug from Newton, New Hampshire. He wrote Jill my wife a letter and me as well about his courageous daughter Courtney. a contagious laugh, his sister's best friend, her sister's best friend. He shared a story all too familiar to millions of Americans, and many of you when you audit Courtney discovered pills in high school. It's spiraled into addiction. and eventually death from a fentanyl overdose. She was just twenty years old, describing the last 8 years without her, Doug said, There's no worse pain. If their family has turned pain to purpose, working to end the stigma, and changed laws. He told us he wants to start a journey toward American Recovery. Douger with you. Fentanyl is killing more than 70,000 Americans a year. You got it. So let's launch a major surge of how fentanyl production in the sale and trafficking with more drug detection machines, inspection, cargoes, top pills, and powder at the border. Working with curries like FedEx who inspect more packages or drugs. strong fiddling to crack down and fentanyl trafficking. 2nd, let's do more mental health, especially for our children. When millions of young people are struggling with bullying, violence, trauma, we have greater access to mental health care at your schools. We must finally hold social media companies accountable for experimenting or doing running children for profit. It's time to pass bipartisan legislation to stop big tech from collecting personal data on our kids and teenagers online. ban targeted advertising to children and impose stricter limits on the personal data that companies collect on all of us. 3rd, much more to keep this nation's one's fully sacred obligation to equip as we send into harm's way and care for them and their families when they come home. Job training, job placement for veterans and their spouses as they come to return to civilian life. helping veterans afford the rent because no one should be homeless in America, especially someone who served the country. Dennis McDuckett Dennis McDonough is here at the VA. We had a first real discussion and asked him to take the job. I'm glad he did. We were losing up to 25 veterans a day, and suicide. Now we're losing 17 a day to the silence surge of suicide. 17 veterans a day are committing suicide. more than all the people being killed in the wars. Folks VA is doing everything you can. including expanding mental health screening, proven programs that recruit veterans to help other veterans understand what they're going through. get them the help they need. We gotta do more. And 4th, last year, Jill and I reignited the cancer moonshot. that I was able to start with president Obama asked me to lead our administration on this issue. Our goal is to cut the cancer death rates at least by 50% in the next 25 years. Turn more cancers from death sentences to treatable diseases. provide more support for patients and their families. It's personal to so many of us, so many of us in this audience. Joining us or Morris and Candice, her nourishment, and the daughter of immigrants from Panama. They met and fell in love in New York City in married in the same chapel as Joan and I got married in New York City. Kindred Spears. He wrote us a letter about his little daughter, Ava, and I saw her just before I came over. She was just a year old when she was diagnosed with rare kidney disease, cancer, After 26 blood transfusions, 11 rounds of radiation, 8 rounds of chemo, chemo, One kidney removed, given a 5% survival rate. He wrote how in the darkest moments he thought if she goes, I can't stay. many of you been through that as well. Julian, I understand that like so many of you. He read Jill's book describing our family's cancer journey. and how we tried to steal moments of joy where we could with Beau. For them, that glimmer of joy was the half smile. of their baby girl. Man, everything. They never gave up hope. Little Ava never gave up hope. She turns 4 next month. They just found out. Abe is beating the odds. is on her way to being cured of cancer. And she's watching from the White House tonight if she's not asleep already. So the lives we can save. With the lives we could say and the lives we've lost, let's just be a truly American moment. that rallies the country and the world together and prove that we can still do big things. 20 years ago into the leadership of president Bush, and countless advocates and champions. He undertook a bipartisan effort through pepfar to transform the global fight against HIV AIDS. It's been a huge success. He thought big. He thought large. He moved. I believe we can do the same thing with cancer. Let's end cancer as we know it. Sure. Some cancers Once and for all, folks, there's one reason why we've been able to do all of these things. our democracy itself. It's the most fundamental thing of all. With democracy, everything's possible. without it, nothing is. The last few years, our democracy has been threatened and attacked, put at risk. put to the test in this very room on January 6th. And then just a few months ago, an unhedged big lie, a sale and unleashed of political violence, the home of the then speaker of the house representatives. using the very same language the insurrectionists use as they stock these halls and chatted on January 6th. Here at night in this chamber, is the man who bears the scars of that brutal attack, but is as tough and as strong as resilient as they get. My friend, Paul Pelosi, Paul Stanley. that such a handy stack should have never happened. We must all speak out. There's no place for political violence in America. We have to protect the right to vote, not suppress the fat fundamental right. Honor the results of our elections, not subvert the will of people. We have to uphold the rule of law and restore trust in our institutions of democracy. We must give hate and extremism. in any form, no safe harbor. Democracy must not be a partisan issue. It's an American issue. Every generation of Americans has faced a moment where they have been called to protect our democracy, defend and stand up for it. And this is our moment. My fellow Americans, we meet tonight at an inflection point. One of those moments than only a few generations ever face. With the direction we now take is gonna decide the course of this nation for decades to come. We're not bystanders of history. We're not powerless before the forces confront us. It's within our power of we, the people. We're facing the test of our time. We have to be the nation we've always been at our best, optimistic, hopeful, forward looking. A nation in the breeze is light over dark. Hope over fear, unity of our diligence, stability over chaos. We have to see each other not as enemies, but as fellow Americans. We're good people. The only nation in the world built on an idea. The only one. Other nations. are defined by geography, ethnicity, but we're the only nation based on an idea. that all of us, every one of us is created equal in the image of god, a nation that stands as a beacon to the world, a nation and a new age of possibilities. So I've come to fulfill my constitutional obligation to report in the state of the union. And here's my, my, my report. Because the soul of this nation is strong, because the backbone of this nation is strong because the people of this nation are strong. The state of the union is strong. I'm not new to this place. I stand here tonight. I've been served as long as about any one of you who've ever served here. But I've never been more optimistic about our future, about the future of America. Just to remember who we are, with the United States of America. And there's nothing, nothing beyond our capacity if we do it together. God bless you all and may god protect our truth.