 Mr. Speaker, Madam Vice President, our first lady and second gentleman. Good to see you guys up there. Members of Congress. Madam Vice President, Madam Vice President D Cheet holders. Thank you for watching. Before we begin, Vada please come to us. We'd love to invite Audience Meeting members right now to visit today's meeting for the Particularly Kingdom of Canada. Yourboth Kimball Your PA directly is up to us. We're here today by preparing for the two minutes. The President mustique to give you the Hus cons. and retired Justice's Supreme Court and to you, my fellow Americans. You know, I start tonight by congratulating 118th Congress and the new Speaker of the House, Kevin McCarthy. I want to congratulate the new leader of the House Democrats. The first African American minority leader in history, hot-keamed Jeffery. You want to display the fact that I can't paint for him. This is the longest-serving leader in the history of the United States Senate Mitch McConnell, where I am Mitch. Congratulations, Chuck Schumer. Another term is Senate Minority Leader. You know, I think you, only this time you have a slightly bigger majority, Mr. Leader. I'm a majority leader. Not that much bigger? Well, I tell you what. I want to give Special Recognition to someone who I think is going to be considered the greatest speaking history of the House of Representative Nancy Pelosi. Folks, the story of America and the story of progress and resilience of always moving forward of never, ever giving up is a story unique among all nations, where the only country that has emerged from every crisis we've ever entered stronger than we got into it. Look, folks, that's what we're doing again. Two years ago, the economy is reeling. I stand here tonight after we've created with the help of many people in this room. Twelve million new jobs. More jobs created in two years than any presence created in four years, because of you all. That's a good question. Two years ago, two years ago, COVID had shut down. Our businesses were closed. Our schools were robbed of so much. And today, COVID no longer controls our lives. And two years ago, democracy faces created a threat to the Civil War. Today, though bruised, our democracy remains unbowed and unbroken. As we gather here tonight, we're ready to next chapter of the Great American Story, a story of progress and resilience. When world leaders ask me to define America, they do believe it or not, I can define it in one word, and I mean this, possibilities. We don't think anything is beyond our capacity. Everything is a possibility. You know, we're often told that Democrats and Republicans can't work together. But over the past two years, we've proved the cynics and they say is wrong. Yes, we disagree plenty. And yes, there are times when Democrats went alone. But time and again, Democrats and Republicans came together. They came together to defend us stronger and safer Europe. You came together the past one generation, one generation infrastructure law, building bridges, connecting our nation and our people. We came together the past most significant law ever, helping victims expose the toxic and burn pits. And in fact, it was important. In fact, I signed over 300 bipartisan pieces of legislation since becoming president. And we're authorizing the Violence Councilman Act, the Electoral County Forum Act, the respect for marriage act that protects the right to marry the person you love. And to my Republican friends, if we could work together the last Congress, there's no reason we can't work together and find consensus on important things in this Congress as well. I think... The war on this form is iron, but I think the people sent us a clear message. Fighting for the sake of fighting, power for the sake of power, conflict for the sake of conflict gets us nowhere. That's always been my vision of our country and I know it's many of yours. Through store the soul of the nation, to rebuild the backbone of America, America's middle class and unite the country. We've been sent here to finish the job in my view. For decades, the middle class has been hollowed out in more than...and not no one administration but for a long time. Too many good-paying manufacturing jobs move overseas. Factories close down. Once thriving cities and towns that many of you represent became shadows of what they used to be, and along the way, something else we lost, pride, our sense of self-worth, our answer for President to fundamentally change things, to make sure our economy works for everyone so we can all feel that pride in what we do. To build an economy from the bottom up in the middle out, not from the top down, because when the middle class does well, the poor have a ladder up and the wealthy still do very well. We all do well. I know a lot of you always kid me for always quoting my dad, but my dad used to say, Joey, a job is about a lot more than a paycheck. He's really going to say this. It's about a lot more than a paycheck. It's about your dignity. It's about respect. It's about being able to look at your kidney, and say, honey, it's going to be okay and meaning. We'll folks. So let's look at the results. We're not finished yet by any stretch of imagination, but unemployment rate is a 3.4% of 50-year low. A near record. A near record unemployment. A near record unemployment. A near record unemployment for black and Hispanic workers. You've already created your help, 800,000 good-paying manufacturing jobs, the fastest growth in 40 years. And where is it written? Where is it written that America can lead the world of manufacturing? And I don't know where that's written. For too many decades, we import a projection and export a jobs. Now thanks to what you've all done, we're exporting American products and creating American jobs. Both inflation has been a global problem because the pandemic disrupted our supply chains and Putin's unfair and brutal war in Ukraine disrupted energy supplies as well as food supplies, blocking all that grain in Ukraine. But we're better positioned than any country on Earth right now. But we have more to do, but here at home inflation is coming down. Here at home gas prices down at $1.50 from their peak. Food inflation is coming down, not fast enough, but coming down. Inflation has fallen every month for the last six months. Our take home pay has gone up. Additionally, over the last two years, a record 10 million Americans applied to start new businesses, 10 million. And by the way, every time, every time someone starts, if small business is an active hope and Madam Vice President, I want to thank you for leading that effort to ensure the small business have access to capital and the historic laws we enacted that are going to just come into being. Over the next few years, I've seen it here last year. I shared to do a story of American genius and possibilities, semiconductors, small computer chips and size of the fingerprint that power everything from cell phones, automobiles and so much more. These chips were invented in America. Let's get that straight. They're invented in America. We used to make 40 percent of the world's chips. In the last several decades, we lost our edge. We're down and only producing 10 percent. We all saw what happened during the pandemic when chip factories shut down overseas. Today's automobiles need 3,000 chips, each of those automobiles. But American automobiles couldn't make enough cars because there weren't enough chips. Car prices went up. People got laid off. So did everything from refrigerators to cell phones. We can never let that happen again. That's why we came together the past of bipartisan chips and science act. I know I've been criticized for saying this, but I'm not changing my view. We're going to make sure the supply chain for America begins in America. The supply chain begins in America. We've already created. We've already created 800,000 new manufacturing jobs without this law before the law kicks in. With this new law, we're going to create hundreds of thousands of new jobs across the country. I mean all across the country, not just the coast, but through the middle of the country as well. That's going to come from companies that have announced more than $300 billion in investment in American manufacturing over the next few years. Outside of Columbus, Ohio, Intel's ability to semiconductor factories on a thousand acres, literally a field of dreams. It's going to create 10,000 jobs at one investment. 10,000 construction jobs, 3,000 jobs in those factories once they're finished. They call them factories. Jobs paid in average of $130,000 a year, and many do not require a college degree. Jobs, because we work together these jobs where people don't have to leave home to search for opportunity. It's just getting started. Think about the new homes, the small businesses, the big, the medium-sized businesses. So much more that's going to be needed to support those three thousand permanent jobs. The factories are going to be built. Talk to mayors and governors, Democrats, Republicans, and they'll tell you what this means for their communities. We're seeing these fields of dreams transform to the heartland. To maintain the strongest economy of the world, we need the best infrastructure in the world. In folks, as you all know, we used to be number one in the world infrastructure. We've sunk to 13th in the world. The United States of America, 13th in the world in infrastructure, modern infrastructure. Now we're coming back because we came together and passed the bipartisan infrastructure law. The largest investment in infrastructure since President Eisenhower's interstate highway system. In folks, already we've funded over 20,000 projects, including major airports in Boston to land in the Portland. Republicans actually are going to put thousands of people to work rebuilding our highways, our bridges, our railroads, our tunnels, ports, airports, clean water, high-speed internet, all across America, urban, rural, tribal, and folks were just getting started. We're just getting started. And I mean it sincerely. I want to thank my Republican friends who voted for the law. And my Republican friends who voted against it as well. But I'm still, I still get asked to fund the projects in those districts as well, but don't worry. I promise I'd be a president for all Americans. We'll fund these projects. And I'll see you at the groundbreaking. This law, this law will further unite all of America. Projects like Brent Sprenbridge and Kentucky over their Ohio River, built 60 years ago. Badly needed repairs. One of the nation's most congested freight routes carrying $2 billion for the freight every single day across the Ohio River. And folks, I've been talking about fixing for decades, but we're really finally going to get it done. I went there last month with Democrats and Republicans, and from both states, to deliver a commitment of $1.6 billion for this project. While I was there, I met a young woman named Sarah, who's here to not know where Sarah is, is she up in the box? I don't know. Sarah, how are you? Well, Sarah, for 30 years. For 30 years, I learned she told me she'd been a proud member of the Iron World, her local 44, known as, known as the Cowboys and the Sky. The folks who built, built Cincinnati skyline. Sarah said she can't wait to be 10 stories above the Ohio River building that new bridge. God bless her. That's pride. And that's also building, we're building back pride. Look, we're also replacing poisonous lead pipes that go into 10 million homes in America. 400,000 school and childcare centers. So every child in America, every child in America and drink the water instead of having permanent damage to their brain. Look, we're making sure, we're making sure that every community, every community in America is access to affordable high-speed internet. No parents should have to drive by McDonald's parking lot to help for do their homework online or their kids, which many thousands were doing across the country. And when we do these projects, and again, I get criticized this is what I make no Jesus for it. We're going to buy American, we're going to buy American folks. And it's totally, it's totally consistent within an asset trade rules. Buy America has been the loss since 1933, but for too long past administration's Democratic and Republican have fought to get around it. Not anymore. Tonight, I'm announcing new standards require all construction materials used in federal infrastructure projects to be made in America. Made in America. I mean it. No. No. Glass, drywall, fire-crafted cable. And on my watch, American roads, bridges and American highways are going to be made with American products as well. Folks, my economic plans about investing in places and people that have been forgotten. So many of you listening to me tonight. I know you feel it. So many of you felt like you've just simply been forgotten. I made the economic of people in the past four decades. Too many people have been left behind and treated it like they're invisible. Maybe that's you watching from home. Remember the jobs that went away. You remember them, don't you? Folks at home, remember them. You wonder whether the path even exists anymore for your children to get ahead without having to move away. Well, that's why I get that. That's why we're building an economy where no one's left behind. Jobs are coming back. Pride is coming back because choices we made in the last several years. You know, this is my view of blue-collar blueprint to rebuild America and make a real difference in your lives at home. For example, to many of you Lane, bed and night like my dad did, stare at the ceiling wondering what in God names happens if this, if your spouse gets cancer or your child gets deadly ill or something happens to you. Are you going to have you any money to pay for those medical bills? Are you going to have to sell the house or try to get a second mortgage on it? I get it. I get it. With the Inflation Reduction Act that I signed in the law, we're taking on powerful interest to bring health care costs down so you can sleep better at night with more security. You know, we pay more for prescription drugs than any nation in the world. We say it again. We pay more for prescription drugs than any major nation on earth. For example, one in 10 Americans has diabetes. Many of you in this chamber do. And then the audience, but every day millions need insulin to control their diabetes so they can literally stay alive. Instance has been around for over 100 years. The guy invented it didn't even patent it because he wanted it to be available for everyone. It cost the drug companies roughly $10 a while to make that insulin. Packaging it on all and you may get up to $13. But big pharma has been unfairly charging people $100 to $4 to $500 a month, making record profits. Not anymore. Not anymore. So many things that we did are only now coming to fruition. We said we were doing this and we said we passed a law to do it. But people didn't know because the law didn't take effect until January 1 of this year. We capped the cost of insulin at $35 a month for seniors on medical. People are going to get us finding out. I'm sure you're getting the same calls I'm getting. Look, there are millions of other Americans who do not or are not on Medicare, including 200,000 young people with type 1 diabetes and these insulin needs insulin to stay alive. Let's finish the job this time. Let's cap the cost of insulin for everybody at $35. Folks, the big pharma is still going to do very well at promish y'all. I promise you they're going to do very well. This law also caps and won't even go into effect on the 2025. Cost out of pocket drug costs for seniors on Medicare at a maximum of $2,000 year. You don't have to pay more than $2,000, no matter how much your drug costs are. Because you know why? You all know it. Many of you, like many of my family, have cancer. You know the drugs can range from $10, $11, $14,000 for the cancer drugs. Now drug prices rise faster than inflation. Drug companies are going to have to pay Medicare back the difference. And finally, we're finally giving Medicare the power to negotiate drug prices. Bringing down bringing down prescription drug costs, doesn't just save seniors money. It cuts the federal deficit by billions of dollars. By hundreds of billions of dollars, because these prescription drugs are drugs purchased by Medicare to make, keep their commitment to the seniors. Well guess what? Instead of paying $400,000, $500 a month, you're paying $15,000, that's a lot of savings for the federal government. And by the way, why wouldn't we want that? Now some members here are threatening, and I know it's not official party positions, so I'm not going to exaggerate. But certainly to repeal the inflation reduction act. As my coach, that's okay, that's fair. As my football coach is to say, lots of luck in your senior year. Make no mistake, if you try anything to raise the cost of Brazilian jobs, I will veto it. I'm pleased to say, the North American Health of the Health Insurance now, then ever in history. A record 16 million people are rolling in affordable care act. And thanks to the law of sign last year, saving millions of saving $800 year on their premiums. And by the way, that law was written, and the benefit expires in 2025. So why plead to some of you at least to this audience? Let's finish the job and make these savings permanent. Expand coverage, I'm dedicated. Look, the inflation reduction act is also the most significant investment ever in climate change. Ever. APPLAUSE Lauren utility bill, dating American jobs, leading the world to a clean energy future. I visited the devastating aftermath of record floods, drought storms, and wildfires from Arizona and Mexico to all the way up to the Canadian border. More timber has been burned alive observe from helicopters than the entire state of Missouri. And we don't have global warming, not a problem. In addition to emergency recovery, from Puerto Rico to Florida to Idaho, we're rebuilding for the long term. New electric grids that are able to weather major storms and not prevent those fire forest fires. Roads and water system will stand the next big flood. Clean energy to cut pollution and create jobs and communities off and left behind. We're going to build 500,000 electric vehicle charging stations installed that will cross the country by tens of thousands of IBW workers. And the helping family save more than $1,000 here with tax credits. The purchase electric vehicles and efficient appliances, energy efficient appliances, historic conservation efforts to responsible stores of our land. Let's face reality, the climate crisis doesn't care if you're in a red or blue state. It's an existential threat. We have an obligation not to ourselves with our children and grandchildren to confront it. I'm proud of how America at last is stepping up to the challenge. We're still going to need oil and gas for a while, but guess what? No, we do. But there's so much more to do. We got to finish the job. And we pay for these investments in our future by finally making the wealthiest and biggest corporations begin to pay their fair share. Let's begin. Look on the calculus. I'm a capitalist, but pay your fair share. I think a lot of you at home, a lot of you at home agree with me and many people that you know the tax system is not fair. Whoa. The idea that in 2020, 55 of the largest corporations in America, the Fortune 500, made $40 billion in profits and paid zero in federal taxes, zero, folks, simply not fair. But now because of the law, I signed billion dollar companies have to pay a minimum of 15%. God love them. 15%. That's the rest of the list pays. APPLAUSE And any of your crystal clear I said at the very beginning, under my plans as long as I'm president, nobody earning less than $400,000 will pay in additional penny in taxes. Nobody not one penny. Well, let's finish the job. There's more to do. We have to reward work, not just wealth. Past my proposal for the billionaire minimum tax. You know, there's a thousand billionaires in America. It's up from about 600 in the beginning of the term. But no billionaire should be paying a lower tax rate than the school teacher or firefighter. I mean, think about it. APPLAUSE I mean, I know you aren't enthusiastic about that, but think about it. Think about it. Have you noticed big goal just reported his profits, record profits? Last year they made $200 billion in the midst of a gold-energy crisis. I think it's outrageous. Why? They invested too little of that profit increase domestic production. And when I talked to a couple of them, they said, we're afraid you're going to shut down all the oil. The oil is all the oil refineries anyway. So why should we invest in them? I said, we're going to need oil for at least another decade. And that's going to exceed and beyond it. We're going to need it. Production. If they had in fact invested in the production and keep gas prices down. Instead, they used the record profits to buy back their own stock, rewarding the CEOs and shareholders. Corporations ought to do the right thing. That's why I propose we quadrupled the tax on corporate stock buybacks and recurged long-term investments. So still making sense of a profit. Let's finish the job and close the loopholes to allow very wealthy to avoid paying their taxes. Instead of cutting a number of orders for wealthy taxpayers, I just signed a law to reduce the deficit by $114 billion by cracking down on wealthy tax sheets. That's being fiscally responsible. And the last two years, my administration has cut the deficit by more than $1.7 trillion. The largest deficit reduction in American history. On a previous administration, the American deficit went up four years in a row because those record deficits, no president, added more to the national debt. In any four years in my predecessor, nearly 25% of the entire national debt that took over 200 years to accumulate was added by just one administration alone. And the last one, third of facts, check it out. Check it out. How did Congress respond to that debt? They did the right thing. They lifted the debt ceiling three times without preconditions or crisis. They paid American bills to prevent an economic disaster of the country. For tonight, I'm asking the Congress to follow suit. Let's commit here tonight to the full phase of the United States America will never ever be questioned. So many of some of my Republican friends want to take the economy hostage. I get it unless I agree to the recognized plans. All you at home should know what those plans are. Instead of making the wealthy pay their fair share of some Republicans, some Republicans want Medicare and Social Security Sunset. I'm not saying it's a majority. Let me give you anybody who doubts it. Contact my office. I'll give you a copy. I'll give you a copy of the proposal. I mean, it's Congress doesn't vote. I'm glad to see and I tell you, I enjoy conversion. You know, it means that if Congress doesn't keep the programs the way they are, they'd go the other Republicans say, I'm not saying it's a majority of you. I don't even think it's even a significant one. But it's being proposed by individuals. I'm not politely not naming them, but it's being proposed by some of you. Look. Look. Folks, the ideas that we're not going to be, we're not going to be moved into being threatened to default on the debt if we don't respond. Folks. So folks, as we all apparently agree, so Security Medicare is off the books now, right? Hang out to this one. All right. Everybody. They got unanimity. So Security Medicare, our life life, from millions of seniors, Americans have to pay into them from the very first paycheck they started. So tonight, let's all agree. And we currently are. Let's stand up for seniors. Stand up and show them. We'll not cut so security. We will not cut Medicare. Those benefits belong in America to people they earned it. If anyone tries to cut so security, which apparently no one's going to do. If anyone tries to cut Medicare, I'll stop them. I'll veto it. And both, I'm not going to allow them to take away. Be taken away, not today, not tomorrow, not everybody, but apparently it's not going to be a problem. Next month, when I offered my fiscal plan, I asked my Republican friends to lay down their plan as well. I really mean it. Let's sit down together and discuss our mutual plans together. Let's do that. I can tell you, the plan I'm going to show is going to cut the deficit by another $2 trillion. And I won't cut a single bit of Medicare or Social Security. In fact, we're going to extend the Medicare trust fund in least two decades. Because that's going to be the next argument. How do we keep it solved? Right? Well, we'll not raise tax anyone making under 400 grand, but we'll pay for it the way we talked about. It's not by making sure that the wealthy and big corporations pay their pressure. Look, look, look, here's the deal. They're not just taking advantage of the tax code. They're taking advantage of the American consumer. Here's my message to all of you out there. I have your back. We're already preventing Americans and receiving a surprise medical bills. Stopping $1 billion surprise bills per month so far. But protecting seniors, life savings, by cracking down in nursing homes that commit fraud and danger patients say to prescribe drugs that are not needed. Minions of Americans can now save thousands of dollars because they can finally get a hearing aid over the counter without a prescription. Look, capitalism without competition is not capitalism. It's extortion. It's exploitation. Last year, I cracked down with the help of many of you on foreign shipping companies that were making you pay higher prices for every good coming into the country. I signed a bipartisan bill of cut shipping costs by 90 percent, helping American farmers, businessmen, and consumers. Let's finish the job. Pass the bipartisan legislation of strength and stress and antitrust enforcement and for big, and for event, big online platforms are giving their own products an unfair advantage. Modern administration is also taking on junk fees. Those hidden search charges too many companies use to make you pay more. For example, we're making airlines show you the full ticket price upfront. Refund your money if your flight is canceled or delayed. We've reduced exorbitant bank overdrafts by saving consumers more than $1 billion a year. For cutting credit card late fees by 75 percent from $30 to $8. Look, junk fees may not matter to very well through it. They matter to most other folks in homes like the one I grew up in, like many of you did. They add up to $100 a month. They make it hard for you to pay your bills or afford that family trip. I know how unfair it feels when a company overcharges you to get away with it. Not anymore, we've written a bill to stop at all. It's called the Junk Feed Prevention Act. We're going to ban surprise resort fees that hotels charge on your bill. Those fees can cost you up to $90 a night in hotels that aren't even resorts. We, the idea that cable internet and cell phone companies can charge you 200 or more if you decide to switch to another provider. Give me a break. We can stop service fees on tickets or concerts and sporting events that make companies as close all of fees upfront. And we'll prohibit airlines from charging $50 round trip for family just to be able to sit together. Baggies fees are bad enough. Airlines can't treat your child like a piece of baggage. Americans are tired of being retired of being played for suckers. So pass. Pass the Junk Feed Prevention Act. So companies stop ripping us off. For too long, workers in Baggates stiffed. But not anymore, we're getting, we're beginning to restore the dignity of work. For example, I should have known this, but I didn't until two years ago. 30 million workers have to sign non-compete agreements with the jobs they take. 30 million. So a cashier at a burger place can't walk across town and take the same job in another burger place and make a few bucks more. It's just changing. But they just changed it because we exposed it. That was part of the deal guys. Look it up. But not anymore. Where Benny knows the agreements, so companies have to compete for workers and pay them what their work. And it must tell you, this is bound to get a response to my friends on my left with the right. I'm so sick and tired of companies breaking the law by preventing workers from organizing. Pass the pro act because business have a right. Workers have a right to form a union. Let's guarantee all workers have a living wage. Let's make sure working parents can afford to raise a family with sick days. Pay family medical leave affordable childcare. That's going to enable millions of more people to go and stay at work and let's restore the full child tax credit, which gave tens of millions of parents a breed in room and cut child poverty in half to the lowest level in history. And by the way, when we do all these things, we increase productivity, we increase economic growth. So let's finish the job. And get more families access to affordable quality housing. Let's get seniors who want to stay in their homes the care they need to do so. Let's get more breathing room to millions of family caregivers looking after their loved ones. Pass my plan so we get seniors and people with disabilities the home care services they need. And support the workers who are doing God's work. These plans are fully paid for and we can afford to do them. Restoring the dignity of work means making education and affordable tickets in the middle class. You know, when we made public education 12 years of it universal in the last century, we made the best educated best paid, we became the best educated best paid nation in the world. The rest of us caught up. It's caught up. It's your own my wife who teaches full time as an expression. I hope I get it right kid. Any nation that out educates us is going to out compete us. Any nation out educates going to out compete us. Folks, we all know 12 years of education is not enough to win the economic competition of 21st century. Do you want to have the best educated workforce? Let's finish the job. By providing access to preschool for three and four years old. Study show that children who go to preschool are nearly 50% more likely to finish high school. We'll go on to earn a two or four year degree. No matter their background that came from. Let's give public school teachers a raise. We're making progress by reducing student debt, increasing Pell grants, we're working in middle class families. Let's finish the job and connect students to career opportunities starting in high school. Provide access to two years of community college, the best career training in American addition to being a pathway to a four year degree. Let's offer every American a packed or good career whether they go to college or not. The folks folks in the midst of the COVID crisis when schools were closed and we were shutting down everything. Let's recognize how far we came in the fight against the pandemic itself. While the virus is not gone, thanks to resilience of the American people and the ingenuity of medicine. We broke in the COVID grip on us. COVID deaths are down by 90 percent. We've saved millions of lives and opened up our country, we opened our country back up and soon we'll end the public health emergency. But that's called a public health emergency. But we'll remember the toll and pain that's never going to go away. More than a million Americans lost their lives in the COVID. A million families grieving children and orphaned empty chairs of the dining room table constantly reminding you that she used to sit there. Remembering them, we remain vigilant. We still need to monitor dozens of variants and support new vaccines and treatments. So Congress needs to fund these efforts and keep America safe. And as we emerge from this crisis, stronger, we're also got to double down on prosecuting criminals who stole relief money meant to keep workers and small businesses. That's great. Before I came to office, you remember during that campaign, the big issue was about inspector generals who would protect taxpayers' dollars on their sideline. They were fired. Many people said we don't need them. And fraud became rampant. Last year, I told you the watchdogs are back. Since then, since then, we've recovered billions of taxpayers' dollars. Now let's triple the anti-fraud strike force going after these criminals, double the statute of limitations on these kinds and crack down on identity fraud by criminal syndicates, still billions of dollars, billions of dollars from the American people. And the data shows that for every dollar we put in the fighting fraud, the tax rate get back at least 10 times as much. It matters. It matters. Look, COVID left its scars like the spike in violent crime in 2020. The first year of the pandemic, we have an obligation to make sure all people are safe. Public safety depends on public trust as all of us know, but too often that trust is violated. Join us tonight of the parents of Tyre Nichols. Welcome. We've had to bear Tyre, last week. As many of you know, there's no words to describe the heartache or brief of losing the child, but imagine. Imagine if you lost that child for hands of the law. Imagine having to worry whether a son or daughter came home from walking down the street, playing in the park or just driving a car. Most of us in here had never had to have the talk, the talk that Brown and Black parents have had to have with their children. Bow, hunter, ashling my children. I never had to have the talk and I never had to tell them if a police officer pulls you over, turn your interior lights on right away. Don't reach for your license. Keep your hands on the steering wheel. Imagine having to worry like that every single time you keep getting a car. Here's what Tyre's mother shared with me when I spoke to her. When I asked her how she finds the courage to carry out and speak out, the faith of God she said her son was, quote, a beautiful soul and something good will come of this. Imagine how much courage and care that takes. It's up to us, to all of us. We all want the same thing. Neighborhoods free of violence, law enforcement of enforcement of earned the community's trust. Just as every cop when they pin on that badge in the morning has a right to be able to go home at night, so does everybody else out there. Our children have a right to come home safely. Equal protection under the law is a covenant we have with each other in America. We know police officers put their lives in the line every single night and day. And we know we asked them in many cases that do too much to be counseled as social workers, psychologists responding to drug overdose as mental health crises and so much more. In one sense, we asked much too much of them. I know most cops and their families are good, decent, honorable people of vast majority. But they risked. And they risked their lives every time they put that shield on. But what happened to Tyree and Memphis happens too often. We have to do better. Give law enforcement the real training they need. Hold them to hire standards. Help them succeed in keeping it safe. We also need more first responders and professionals to address the growing mental health substance abuse challenges. More resources reduce violent crime and gun problems. More community intervention programs. More investment in housing, education and job training. All this can help prevent violence in the first place. When police officers or police departments violate the public trust, they must be held accountable. With the support of the families of victims, civil rights groups and law enforcement, I signed an executive order for all federal officers, banning chokeholds, restricting no-knock warrants and other key elements of the George Floyd Act. Let's commit ourselves to make the words of Tyler's mom true. Something good must come from this. Something good. And all of us. All of us. Folks, just difficult but it's simple. All of us in this chamber. We need to rise to this moment. We can't turn away. Let's do what we know in our hearts. We need to do. Let's come together to finish the job on police reform. Do something. Do something. That was the plea of parents who lost their children you've already. I met with every one of them. Do something about gun violence. Thank God. We did. Passing the most sweeping gun safety law on three decades. That includes things like that the majority of responsible gun owners already support. Enhanced background checks for 18 to 21 years old. Red flag laws keeping guns out of the hands of people who are danger to themselves and others. But we know our work is not done. Join us tonight as Brandon say a 26 year old hero. Brandon put his college dreams on hold to bid his mom's side. Mom's side when she's dying from cancer. Brandon. Brandon now works in the dance studio start a by his grandparents two weeks ago during the lunar new year celebrations. He heard the studio door closed and he saw a man standing there pointing semi automatic pistol at him. He thought he was going to die. But he thought about the people inside and that incident he found the courage to act and wrestle the semi automatic pistol away from the government would already kill 11 people another dance studio 11. He saved lives. It's time we do the same. Band of soul weapons now. Band of now. Once before. I love the folks who do that in 1994. In 10 years that band was raw mass shootings went down after he led an expire in a Republican administration mass shootings tripled. Let's finish the job and band these assault weapons. And let's also come together in immigration. Make it a bipartisan issue once again. We know we now have a record number of personnel working to secure the border. Resting 8,000 human smugglers. Seize you know for 23,000 pounds of fentanyl in just the last several months. We've launched a new border plan last month on lawful migration of Cuba, Haiti, Nicaragua, and Venezuela has come down 97% as the consequence of that. But American border problems won't be fixed until Congress acts. If we don't pass my cop right. Labor gush reform. Let at least pass my plan to provide the equipment and officers to secure the border. And a pathway to citizenship for a dreamer. Those on temporary status farm workers, essential workers. Here are the people's house. It's our duty to protect all the people's rights and freedoms. Congress must restore the right and the Congress must restore the right. I was taken away in Roe v. Wade and protect Roe v. Wade. If every woman will be a constant right. The place President and I are doing everything. To protect access to reproduction, health care, and safe thought patient safety. But already more than a dozen states are enforcing an extreme abortion bans. Make no mistake about it. If Congress passes a national ban, I will veto it. But let's also pass. It's also passed the bipartisan equality act. The sure LBG LGBTQ Americans, especially transgender young people, can live with safety and dignity. Our strength is not just the example of our power, but the power of our example. Let's remember the world's watching. I spoke from this chamber one year ago, just days after Vladimir Putin unleashed his brutal attack against Ukraine. A murder assault, a voking image of death and destruction, Europe suffered in World War II. Putin's invasion has been a test for the ages. Test for America. Test for the world. Would we stand for the most basic of principles? Would we stand for sovereignty? We stand for the right of people to live free of tyranny. Would we stand for the defense of democracy? For such defense matters to us because it keeps peace and prevents open season. I would be aggressive and threads our prosperity. One year later, we know the answer. Yes, we won and we did. And together, we did when America always does it our best. We led. We united NATO. We built a global coalition. We stood against Putin's aggression. We stood with Ukrainian people tonight. But once again, joined by the Ukrainians ambassador to the United States, she represents not her and just her nation, but the courage of her people ambassador is our ambassador is here. United, we're in United, our support of your country. Would you stand so we can all take a look at your attention? Thank you. As we're going to stand with you, as long as it takes, our nation is working for more freedom, more dignity, more peace, not just in Europe and everywhere. Before I came to office, the story was about how the people of the public at China was increasing its power and America is failing in the world. Not anymore. We made clear, and I may forgive my personal conversation, which was many with President Xi, that we seek competition, not conflict, but I will make no apologies that we're investing to make America stronger. Investing in American innovation and energy to the find the future that China intends to be dominating. Investing in our alliances and working with our allies to protect advanced technologies so they will not be used against us. Modernize in our military to safeguard stability and determine the turn of aggression. Today, we're the strongest position in decades to compete with China or anyone else in the world. Anywhere else in the world. I'm committed to work with China where we can advance American interests and benefit the world, but make no mistake about it. As we made clear last week, if China threatens our sovereignty, we will act to protect our country and we did. Look, let's be clear, when in the competition should unite all of us, we face serious challenges across the world. But in the past two years, democracies have become stronger and out weaker. A talker says, we're not stronger. Name me a world later who changed places with Xi Jinping. Name me one. Name me one. America's rallying the world to meet those challenges from climate to global health to food insecurity, to terrorism, to territorial aggression. Allies are stepping up, spending more and doing more. Look, the bridges were formed between partners in the Pacific and those in the Atlantic, and those who bet against America how wrong they are. It's never, ever been a good bet to bet against America, never. Well, I came to office most assured that bipartisanship assumed was impossible. But never believed it. That's why a year ago, I offered a unity agenda to the nation that I stood here. We made real progress together. We passed the law and made it easy for doctors to prescribe effective treatments for opioid addiction. We passed the John Safety Law making historic investments in mental health. We launched the ARPA-H drive for breakthrough in the fights against cancer, Alzheimer's and diabetes, and so much more. We passed the Heath Robinson Packtack, named after the late Iraq war veteran who's story about exposure to toxic birth kits, I shared here last year. I understand something about those burn pits, but there's so much more to do. We can do it together. Joining us tonight is a father named Doug from Newton, New Hampshire. He wrote Jill, my wife from letter, and me as well, about his courageous daughter, Courtney. A contagious laugh, a sister's best friend, her sister's best friend. He shared the story all took familiar to millions of Americans in many of you in the audience. Courtney discovered pills in high school. It spiraled into addiction and eventually death from a fentanyl overdose. She's just 20 years old. Describing the last eight years without her, Doug said, there's no worse pain. If their family is turned pain to purpose, working to end the stigma and change laws, he told us he wants to start a journey toward American recovery. Doug or with you, fentanyl is killing more than 70,000 Americans a year. You got it. So let's launch a major surge of fentanyl production in the sale in trafficking. With more drug detection machines, inspection car growth, stop pills and powder at the border. Working with curries like FedEx would stick more packages for drugs. Strong penalties to crack down in fentanyl trafficking. Second, let's do more mental health especially for our children. When millions of young people are struggling with bully and violence trauma, we're in a greater access to mental health care at their schools. We must finally hold social media companies accountable for experimenting and doing running children for profit. There's time to pass by for us legislation to stop big tech from collecting personal data on our kids and teenagers online. They had targeted advertising to children and impose stricter limits on the personal data that companies collect on all of us. Third, let's do more to keep this nation's ones truly sacred obligation to equip those we send in the hard way and care for them and their families and they come home. Job training, job placement for veterans and their spouses as they come to return to civilian life. Helping veterans afford the rent because no one should be homeless in America, especially someone who served the country. Dennis McDuck and Dennis McDunnis here are the VA. We had a first real discussion when asking to take the job. I'm glad he did. We were losing up to 25 veterans a day on suicide. Now we're losing 17 a day to the silent scourge of suicide. 17 veterans a day are committed suicide. More than all the people being killed in the wars. Folks, VA's doing everything it can, including expanding mental health screening, proven programs and recruits veterans to help other veterans understand what they're going through, get them the help they need. We got to do more. And fourth, last year, Jill and I reignited the cancer moonshot that I was able to start with President Obama asking to lead our administration on this issue. Our goal is to cut the cancer death rates at least by 50 percent in the next 25 years. Turn more cancer from death sentences to treatable diseases, provide more support for patients and their families. It's personal to so many of us, so many of us in this audience. Joining us, remorse and Candice, an Irishman and a daughter of immigrants from Panama, they met and fell in love in New York City and got married in the same chapel as Jill and I got married in New York City. Kindred spirits. He wrote us a letter about his little daughter Ava and I saw her just before I came over. She was just a year old when she was diagnosed with rare kidney disease, cancer. After 26 blood transfusions, 11 rounds of radiation, eight rounds of keynote, chemo, one kidney removed, giving a 5 percent survival rip. He wrote how on the darkest moments he thought if she goes, I can't stay. Many of you have been through that as well. Jill and I understand that like so many of you. He read Jill's book describing our families cancer journey and how we tried to steal moments of joy where we could with both. For them, that quimmer of joy was the half smile of their baby girl. Men, everything could. They never gave a pope. The laven ever gave a pope. She turns four next month. They just found out A. Ms. Beating the odds is on her way to make sure to cancer. And she's watching from the White House tonight if you're not asleep already. For the lives we can save. For the lives we can save the lives we've lost, let's just be a truly American moment. But rallies the country and the world together and prove that we can still do big things. 20 years ago in the leadership of President Bush and countless advocates and champions, he undertook a bipartisan effort through PEPFAR to transform the global fight against HIV-AIDS. It's been a huge success. He thought big. He thought large. He moved. I believe we can do the same thing with cancer. Let's thank cancers. We know it. True as some cancers, once and for all, folks, there's one reason why we've been able to do all of these things, our democracy itself. It's the most fundamental thing of all, with democracy, everything's possible, without it, nothing is. The last few years our democracy has been threatened and attacked put at risk, put to the test in this very room on January the 6th, and then just a few months ago, a non-hinged big lie, a sale and unleashed a political violence, the home of the then-speaker, the House of Representatives. Using the very same language, the insurrectionists as they stalk these halls and chanted on January 6th. Here tonight in this chamber is the man who bears the scars of that brutal attack. But is this tough and as strong as resilient as they get? My friend Paul Pelosi calls to him. It's such a heinous act should have never happened. We must all speak out. There's no place for political violence in America. We have to protect the right to vote, not suppress the fat-fundamental right. On are the results of our elections, not subvert the will of people. We have to poll the rule of law and restore trust on our institutions of democracy. We must give hate and extremism in any form no safe harbor. Democracy must not be a part of this initiative. It's an American issue. Every generation of Americans face the moment where they haven't been called to protect our democracy to fund its stand-up for it. And this is our moment. My fellow Americans, we meet tonight at an inflection point. One of those moments, and only a few generations ever face, where the direction we now take is going to decide the course of this nation for decades to come. We're not bystanders of history. We're not powerless before the forces that confront us. It's within our power of we the people. We're facing the test of our time. We have to be the nation. We've always been in our best. Optimistic, hopeful, forward-looking. A nation that embraces light over dark, hope over fear, unity over justice, stability over chaos. We have to see each other not as enemies, but as fellow Americans. We're good people. The only nation in the world built on an idea, the only one. Other nations are defined by geography, ethnicity, but we're the only nation based on an idea that all of us, every one of us, is created equal. The image of God, a nation that stands as a beacon of the world, a nation and a new age of possibilities. So I've come to fulfill my constitutional obligation to report and to state of the union, and here's what I'm going to write in my report, because the soul of this nation is strong, because the backbone of this nation is strong, because the people of this nation are strong, to state of the union is strong. I'm not near to this place. I stand here tonight having served as long as about any one of you have ever served you. But I've never been more optimistic about our future, about the future of America. We just remember who we are. We're the United States of America, and there's nothing, nothing beyond our capacity if we do it together. God bless you all, we may God protect our truth.